
1. J Proteome Res. 2007 May;6(5):1917-32. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 3. Ligands, post-translational
modifications, and diseases associated with intrinsically disordered proteins.

Xie H(1), Vucetic S, Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Uversky 
VN.

Currently, the understanding of the relationships between function, amino acid
sequence, and protein structure continues to represent one of the major
challenges of the modern protein science. As many as 50% of eukaryotic proteins
are likely to contain functionally important long disordered regions. Many
proteins are wholly disordered but still possess numerous biologically important 
functions. However, the number of experimentally confirmed disordered proteins
with known biological functions is substantially smaller than their actual number
in nature. Therefore, there is a crucial need for novel bionformatics approaches 
that allow projection of the current knowledge from a few experimentally verified
examples to much larger groups of known and potential proteins. The elaboration
of a bioinformatics tool for the analysis of functional diversity of
intrinsically disordered proteins and application of this data mining tool to
>200 000 proteins from the Swiss-Prot database, each annotated with at least one 
of the 875 functional keywords, was described in the first paper of this series
(Xie, H.; Vucetic, S.; Iakoucheva, L. M.; Oldfield, C. J.; Dunker, A. K.;
Obradovic, Z.; Uversky, V.N. Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 1.
Biological processes and functions of proteins with long disordered regions. J.
Proteome Res. 2007, 5, 1882-1898). Using this tool, we have found that out of the
710 Swiss-Prot functional keywords associated with at least 20 proteins, 262 were
strongly positively correlated with long intrinsically disordered regions, and
302 were strongly negatively correlated. Illustrative examples of functional
disorder or order were found for the vast majority of keywords showing strongest 
positive or negative correlation with intrinsic disorder, respectively. Some 80
Swiss-Prot keywords associated with disorder- and order-driven biological
processes and protein functions were described in the first paper (see above).
The second paper of the series was devoted to the presentation of 87 Swiss-Prot
keywords attributed to the cellular components, domains, technical terms,
developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities possessing strong
positive and negative correlation with long disordered regions (Vucetic, S.; Xie,
H.; Iakoucheva, L. M.; Oldfield, C. J.; Dunker, A. K.; Obradovic, Z.; Uversky, V.
N. Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 2. Cellular components, domains,
technical terms, developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities
correlated with long disordered regions. J. Proteome Res. 2007, 5, 1899-1916).
Protein structure and functionality can be modulated by various
post-translational modifications or/and as a result of binding of specific
ligands. Numerous human diseases are associated with protein
misfolding/misassembly/misfunctioning. This work concludes the series of papers
dedicated to the functional anthology of intrinsic disorder and describes
approximately 80 Swiss-Prot functional keywords that are related to ligands,
post-translational modifications, and diseases possessing strong positive or
negative correlation with the predicted long disordered regions in proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/pr060394e 
PMCID: PMC2588348
PMID: 17391016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Proteome Res. 2007 May;6(5):1899-916. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 2. Cellular components, domains,
technical terms, developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities
correlated with long disordered regions.

Vucetic S(1), Xie H, Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Uversky 
VN.

Biologically active proteins without stable ordered structure (i.e.,
intrinsically disordered proteins) are attracting increased attention. Functional
repertoires of ordered and disordered proteins are very different, and the
ability to differentiate whether a given function is associated with intrinsic
disorder or with a well-folded protein is crucial for modern protein science.
However, there is a large gap between the number of proteins experimentally
confirmed to be disordered and their actual number in nature. As a result,
studies of functional properties of confirmed disordered proteins, while helpful 
in revealing the functional diversity of protein disorder, provide only a limited
view. To overcome this problem, a bioinformatics approach for comprehensive study
of functional roles of protein disorder was proposed in the first paper of this
series (Xie, H.; Vucetic, S.; Iakoucheva, L. M.; Oldfield, C. J.; Dunker, A. K.; 
Obradovic, Z.; Uversky, V. N. Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 1.
Biological processes and functions of proteins with long disordered regions. J.
Proteome Res. 2007, 5, 1882-1898). Applying this novel approach to Swiss-Prot
sequences and functional keywords, we found over 238 and 302 keywords to be
strongly positively or negatively correlated, respectively, with long
intrinsically disordered regions. This paper describes approximately 90
Swiss-Prot keywords attributed to the cellular components, domains, technical
terms, developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities possessing strong
positive and negative correlation with long disordered regions.

DOI: 10.1021/pr060393m 
PMCID: PMC2588346
PMID: 17391015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochemistry. 2006 Dec 26;45(51):15731-9. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

Lipid-binding activity of intrinsically unstructured cytoplasmic domains of
multichain immune recognition receptor signaling subunits.

Sigalov AB(1), Aivazian DA, Uversky VN, Stern LJ.

Multichain immune recognition receptors (MIRRs) found on the surface of T cells, 
B cells, mast cells, natural killer cells, basophils, and other immune cells are 
formed by the association of several single-pass transmembrane proteins, with
immunoglobulin-like ligand recognition domains and signal-transducing domains
present on separate subunits. The MIRR signaling subunits all have cytoplasmic
domains containing one or more copies of an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
activation motif (ITAM), tyrosine residues of which are phosphorylated upon
receptor engagement in an early and obligatory event in the signaling cascade.
Despite the proximity to the cell membrane and crucial role in transmembrane
signal transduction, little is known about the structure and lipid-binding
activity of the ITAM-containing cytoplasmic domains. Here we investigate the
conformation and lipid-binding activity of several MIRR cytoplasmic domains,
namely, T cell receptor zetacyt, CD3epsiloncyt, CD3deltacyt, and CD3gammacyt, B
cell receptor Igalphacyt and Igbetacyt, and Fc receptor FcepsilonRIgammacyt,
using purified recombinant proteins. Secondary structure prediction analysis and 
experimental circular dichroism spectra identify each of these cytoplasmic
domains as natively unfolded proteins. We also report that zetacyt,
CD3epsiloncyt, and FcepsilonRIgammacyt bind to acidic and mixed phospholipid
vesicles and that the binding strength correlates with the protein net charge and
the presence of clustered basic amino acid residues. Circular dichroism analysis 
reveals the lack of secondary structure for these domains in lipid-bound form.
Phosphorylation of zetacyt and FcepsilonRIgammacyt does not alter their
random-coil conformation but weakens binding to membranes. The implications of
these results for transmembrane signal transduction by immune receptors are
discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi061108f 
PMCID: PMC2528957
PMID: 17176095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochimie. 2007 Mar;89(3):419-21. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

Binding of intrinsically disordered proteins is not necessarily accompanied by a 
structural transition to a folded form.

Sigalov AB(1), Zhuravleva AV, Orekhov VY.

There are a large number of protein domains and even entire proteins, lacking
ordered structure under physiological conditions. Intriguingly, a highly
flexible, random coil-like conformation is the native and functional state for
many proteins known to be involved in cell signaling. An example is a key
component of immune signaling, the cytoplasmic region of the T cell receptor zeta
subunit. This domain exhibits specific dimerization that is distinct from
non-specific aggregation behavior seen in many systems. In this work, we use
diffusion and chemical shift mapping NMR data to show that the protein does not
undergo a transition between disordered and ordered states upon dimerization.
This finding opposes the generally accepted view on the behavior of intrinsically
disordered proteins, provides evidence for the existence of specific dimerization
interactions for intrinsically disordered protein species and opens a new line of
research in this new and quickly developing field.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2006.11.003 
PMCID: PMC2692994
PMID: 17174464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007 Jan;35(Database issue):D786-93. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

DisProt: the Database of Disordered Proteins.

Sickmeier M(1), Hamilton JA, LeGall T, Vacic V, Cortese MS, Tantos A, Szabo B,
Tompa P, Chen J, Uversky VN, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK.

The Database of Protein Disorder (DisProt) links structure and function
information for intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). Intrinsically
disordered proteins do not form a fixed three-dimensional structure under
physiological conditions, either in their entireties or in segments or regions.
We define IDP as a protein that contains at least one experimentally determined
disordered region. Although lacking fixed structure, IDPs and regions carry out
important biological functions, being typically involved in regulation, signaling
and control. Such functions can involve high-specificity low-affinity
interactions, the multiple binding of one protein to many partners and the
multiple binding of many proteins to one partner. These three features are all
enabled and enhanced by protein intrinsic disorder. One of the major hindrances
in the study of IDPs has been the lack of organized information. DisProt was
developed to enable IDP research by collecting and organizing knowledge regarding
the experimental characterization and the functional associations of IDPs. In
addition to being a unique source of biological information, DisProt opens doors 
for a plethora of bioinformatics studies. DisProt is openly available at
http://www.disprot.org.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkl893 
PMCID: PMC1751543
PMID: 17145717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Cell. 2006 Nov 3;127(3):469-80.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in development and disease.

Clevers H(1).

A remarkable interdisciplinary effort has unraveled the WNT (Wingless and INT-1) 
signal transduction cascade over the last two decades. Wnt genes encode small
secreted proteins that are found in all animal genomes. Wnt signaling is involved
in virtually every aspect of embryonic development and also controls homeostatic 
self-renewal in a number of adult tissues. Germline mutations in the Wnt pathway 
cause several hereditary diseases, and somatic mutations are associated with
cancer of the intestine and a variety of other tissues.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.10.018 
PMID: 17081971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2006 Oct;27(10):518-24. Epub 2006 Aug 14.

Immune cell signaling: a novel mechanistic model reveals new therapeutic targets.

Sigalov AB(1).

Multichain immune recognition receptors (MIRRs) represent a family of surface
receptors that is expressed on different cells and that transduces extracellular 
signals, leading to many biological responses. The most intriguing common
structural feature of MIRR family members is that the extracellular recognition
domains and the intracellular signaling domains are located on separate subunits.
It is not clear how extracellular ligand binding triggers MIRRs and initiates
intracellular signal-transduction processes. In this article, I suggest that the 
structural similarity of the MIRRs provides the basis for the similarity in the
mechanisms of MIRR-mediated transmembrane signaling. This hypothesis assumes that
the therapeutic strategies learned from a novel mechanistic model of
MIRR-mediated signal transduction, the signaling chain homo-oligomerization
model, are generalized for this entire family and have important implications for
the treatment of many disorders that are mediated by immune cells, including HIV.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2006.08.004 
PMID: 16908074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS Comput Biol. 2006 Aug 4;2(8):e100. Epub 2006 Jun 23.

Intrinsic disorder is a common feature of hub proteins from four eukaryotic
interactomes.

Haynes C(1), Oldfield CJ, Ji F, Klitgord N, Cusick ME, Radivojac P, Uversky VN,
Vidal M, Iakoucheva LM.

Recent proteome-wide screening approaches have provided a wealth of information
about interacting proteins in various organisms. To test for a potential
association between protein connectivity and the amount of predicted structural
disorder, the disorder propensities of proteins with various numbers of
interacting partners from four eukaryotic organisms (Caenorhabditis elegans,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Drosophila melanogaster, and Homo sapiens) were
investigated. The results of PONDR VL-XT disorder analysis show that for all four
studied organisms, hub proteins, defined here as those that interact with > or = 
10 partners, are significantly more disordered than end proteins, defined here as
those that interact with just one partner. The proportion of predicted disordered
residues, the average disorder score, and the number of predicted disordered
regions of various lengths were higher overall in hubs than in ends. A binary
classification of hubs and ends into ordered and disordered subclasses using the 
consensus prediction method showed a significant enrichment of wholly disordered 
proteins and a significant depletion of wholly ordered proteins in hubs relative 
to ends in worm, fly, and human. The functional annotation of yeast hubs and ends
using GO categories and the correlation of these annotations with disorder
predictions demonstrate that proteins with regulation, transcription, and
development annotations are enriched in disorder, whereas proteins with catalytic
activity, transport, and membrane localization annotations are depleted in
disorder. The results of this study demonstrate that intrinsic structural
disorder is a distinctive and common characteristic of eukaryotic hub proteins,
and that disorder may serve as a determinant of protein interactivity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020100 
PMCID: PMC1526461
PMID: 16884331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Mol Biol. 2006 Jul 28;360(5):1019-30. Epub 2006 Jun 15.

Variations in the unstructured C-terminal tail of interferons contribute to
differential receptor binding and biological activity.

Slutzki M(1), Jaitin DA, Yehezkel TB, Schreiber G.

Type I interferons (IFNs) elicit antiviral, antiproliferative and
immunomodulatory properties in cells. All of them bind to the same receptor
proteins, IFNAR1 and IFNAR2, with different affinities. While the 13 known
IFNalphas are highly conserved, the C-terminal unstructured tail was found to
have large variation in its net charge, from neutral to +4. This led us to
speculate that the tail may have a role in modulation of the IFN biological
activity, through fine-tuning the binding to IFNAR2. To evaluate this hypothesis,
we replaced the tail of IFNalpha2 with that of IFNalpha8 and IFNbeta tails, or
deleted the last five residues of this segment. Mutations to the more positively 
charged tail of IFNalpha8 resulted in a 20-fold higher affinity to IFNAR2, which 
results in a higher antiviral and antiproliferative activity. Double and multiple
mutant cycle analysis placed the tail near a negatively charged loop on IFNAR2,
comprising of residues Glu 132-134. Deleting the tail resulted in only twofold
reduction in binding compared to the wild-type. Next, we modeled the location of 
the tail using a two-step procedure: first we generated 200 models of the tail
docked on IFNAR2 using HADDOCK, second the models were scored according to the
fit between experimentally determined rates of association of nine mutant
complexes, and their calculated rates using the PARE software. From the results
we suggest that the unstructured tail of IFNalpha is gaining a specific structure
in the bound state, binding to a groove below the 132-134 loop in IFNAR2.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.069 
PMID: 16815442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 11;281(32):22429-33. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

Wnt signaling: multiple pathways, multiple receptors, and multiple transcription 
factors.

Gordon MD(1), Nusse R.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.R600015200 
PMID: 16793760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. BMC Genomics. 2006 Jun 13;7:148.

Verification of predicted alternatively spliced Wnt genes reveals two new splice 
variants (CTNNB1 and LRP5) and altered Axin-1 expression during tumour
progression.

Pospisil H(1), Herrmann A, Butherus K, Pirson S, Reich JG, Kemmner W.

BACKGROUND: Splicing processes might play a major role in carcinogenesis and
tumour progression. The Wnt pathway is of crucial relevance for cancer
progression. Therefore we focussed on the Wnt/beta-catenin signalling pathway in 
order to validate the expression of sequences predicted as alternatively spliced 
by bioinformatic methods. Splice variants of its key molecules were selected,
which may be critical components for the understanding of colorectal tumour
progression and may have the potential to act as biological markers. For some of 
the Wnt pathway genes the existence of splice variants was either proposed (e.g. 
beta-Catenin and CTNNB1) or described only in non-colon tissues (e.g. GSK3beta)
or hitherto not published (e.g. LRP5).
RESULTS: Both splice variants--normal and alternative form--of all selected Wnt
pathway components were found to be expressed in cell lines as well as in samples
derived from tumour, normal and healthy tissues. All splice positions
corresponded totally with the bioinformatical prediction as shown by sequencing. 
Two hitherto not described alternative splice forms (CTNNB1 and LRP5) were
detected. Although the underlying EST data used for the bioinformatic analysis
suggested a tumour-specific expression neither a qualitative nor a significant
quantitative difference between the expression in tumour and healthy tissues was 
detected. Axin-1 expression was reduced in later stages and in samples from
carcinomas forming distant metastases.
CONCLUSION: We were first to describe that splice forms of crucial genes of the
Wnt-pathway are expressed in human colorectal tissue. Newly described splicefoms 
were found for beta-Catenin, LRP5, GSK3beta, Axin-1 and CtBP1. However, the
predicted cancer specificity suggested by the origin of the underlying ESTs was
neither qualitatively nor significant quantitatively confirmed. That let us to
conclude that EST sequence data can give adequate hints for the existence of
alternative splicing in tumour tissues. That no difference in the expression of
these splice forms between cancerous tissues and normal mucosa was found, may
indicate that the existence of different splice forms is of less significance for
cancer formation as suggested by the available EST data. The currently available 
EST source is still insufficient to clearly deduce colon cancer specificity. More
EST data from colon (tumour and healthy) is required to make reliable
predictions.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-7-148 
PMCID: PMC1523213
PMID: 16772034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Acta Oncol. 2006;45(4):375-88.

Common critical pathways in embryogenesis and cancer.

Kelleher FC(1), Fennelly D, Rafferty M.

Cancer may arise because the developmental programs that create the dramatic
alterations in form and structure in embryonic development are potentially
corrupted. The cells in our bodies retain memories of these processes and cancer 
can occur later in life if imperfections occur in the fidelity of these pathways.
This article is particularly interested in the phenomenon of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, which occurs in embryogenesis. Also reviewed are the
small molecules and pathways that are involved both in homeostasis in adult
epithelium and embryogenesis in utero. There are five such pathways in particular
selected for review in this article: the Wnt pathway, Hedgehog, Notch, PAR and
Bone morphogenetic peptide/TGF beta. These are usually conserved throughout
mammalian evolution. Though they have been arbitrarily separated in this article 
they are not exclusive from one another. Their pathologically altered expression 
is found especially frequently in childhood tumours where they may recapitulate
their developmental role, and in tumours that resemble primitive precursor cells.
These pathways are important for selecting cell fates, cellular rearrangements,
cytological context and morphologic design in embryology as well as participating
in epithelial function in adults.

DOI: 10.1080/02841860600602946 
PMID: 16760173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochemistry. 2006 Jun 13;45(23):7154-61.

The paired domain of Pax3 contains a putative homeodomain interaction pocket
defined by cysteine scanning mutagenesis.

Apuzzo S(1), Gros P.

Pax3 is a transcription factor that plays an important regulatory role during
neurogenesis, myogenesis, and formation of neural crest cell derived structures. 
Pax3 has two DNA binding domains, a paired domain (PD) and paired-type
homeodomain (HD) that show complete interdependence for DNA binding, with
mutations in one domain impairing DNA binding by the other domain. Cooperative
interactions between the PD and HD of Pax3 suggest that the two domains may
physically interact for DNA binding. Site-specific modification with thiol
reagents in single cysteine Pax3 mutants was used to determine which segment of
the PD may interact with the HD. Twenty-four single cysteine mutants were
independently introduced in the second alpha-helix (alpha2, positions 59-80) and 
in the beta-hairpin structure (positions 40-41) at the amino terminal portion of 
the PD. These mutants were tested for their ability to bind to PD (P6CON, P3OPT) 
and HD-specific DNA targets (P2), and the effect of treatment with
N-ethylmaleimide on these binding properties was established. In the PD, single
cysteine mutants CL/Q40C, CL/I59C, CL/V60C, CL/P69C, CL/S70C, CL/I72C, CL/S73C,
CL/L76C, CL/V78C, and CL/S79C displayed NEM sensitive DNA binding toward both PD 
and HD targets. Three PD mutants (CL/L41C, CL/A63C, and CL/H64C) showed unusual
behavior, with DNA binding to PD targets being NEM insensitive while DNA binding 
by the HD was abrogated by NEM treatment. Three-dimensional modeling of the NEM
sensitive PD cysteine mutants reveal that they are not randomly distributed, but 
rather that they cluster in a hydrophobic pocket. We propose that this
hydrophobic pocket may serve as a docking site for the HD during DNA binding by
the intact protein.

DOI: 10.1021/bi060009z 
PMID: 16752906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Mol Biol. 2006 Jun 30;360(1):190-203. Epub 2006 May 15.

RNA-dependent folding and stabilization of C5 protein during assembly of the E.
coli RNase P holoenzyme.

Guo X(1), Campbell FE, Sun L, Christian EL, Anderson VE, Harris ME.

The pre-tRNA processing enzyme ribonuclease P is a ribonucleoprotein. In
Escherichia coli assembly of the holoenzyme involves binding of the small (119
amino acid residue) C5 protein to the much larger (377 nucleotide) P RNA subunit.
The RNA subunit makes the majority of contacts to the pre-tRNA substrate and
contains the active site; however, binding of C5 stabilizes P RNA folding and
contributes to high affinity substrate binding. Here, we show that RNase P
ribonucleoprotein assembly also influences the folding of C5 protein. Thermal
melting studies demonstrate that the free protein population is a mixture of
folded and unfolded conformations under conditions where it assembles
quantitatively with the RNA subunit. Changes in the intrinsic fluorescence of a
unique tryptophan residue located in the folded core of C5 provide further
evidence for an RNA-dependent conformational change during RNase P assembly.
Comparisons of the CD spectra of the free RNA and protein subunits with that of
the holoenzyme provide evidence for changes in P RNA structure in the presence of
C5 as indicated by previous studies. Importantly, monitoring the temperature
dependence of the CD signal in regions of the holoenzyme spectra that are
dominated by protein or RNA structure permitted analysis of the thermal melting
of the individual subunits within the ribonucleoprotein. These analyses reveal a 
significantly higher Tm for C5 when bound to P RNA and show that unfolding of the
protein and RNA are coupled. These data provide evidence for a general mechanism 
in which the favorable free energy for formation of the RNA-protein complex
offsets the unfavorable free energy of structural rearrangements in the RNA and
protein subunits.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.001 
PMID: 16750220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biochemistry. 2006 Jun 6;45(22):6873-88.

Intrinsic disorder in transcription factors.

Liu J(1), Perumal NB, Oldfield CJ, Su EW, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Intrinsic disorder (ID) is highly abundant in eukaryotes, which reflect the
greater need for disorder-associated signaling and transcriptional regulation in 
nucleated cells. Although several well-characterized examples of intrinsically
disordered proteins in transcriptional regulation have been reported, no
systematic analysis has been reported so far. To test for the general prevalence 
of intrinsic disorder in transcriptional regulation, we used the predictor of
natural disorder regions (PONDR) to analyze the abundance of intrinsic disorder
in three transcription factor datasets and two control sets. This analysis
revealed that from 94.13 to 82.63% of transcription factors possess extended
regions of intrinsic disorder, relative to 54.51 and 18.64% of the proteins in
two control datasets, which indicates the significant prevalence of intrinsic
disorder in transcription factors. This propensity of transcription factors to
intrinsic disorder was confirmed by cumulative distribution function analysis and
charge-hydropathy plots. The amino acid composition analysis showed that all
three transcription factor datasets were substantially depleted in
order-promoting residues and significantly enriched in disorder-promoting
residues. Our analysis of the distribution of disorder within the transcription
factor datasets revealed that (a) the AT-hooks and basic regions of transcription
factor DNA-binding domains are highly disordered; (b) the degree of disorder in
transcription factor activation regions is much higher than that in DNA-binding
domains; (c) the degree of disorder is significantly higher in eukaryotic
transcription factors than in prokaryotic transcription factors; and (d) the
level of alpha-MoRF (molecular recognition feature) prediction is much higher in 
transcription factors. Overall, our data reflected the fact that eukaryotes with 
well-developed gene transcription machinery require transcription factor
flexibility to be more efficient.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0602718 
PMCID: PMC2538555
PMID: 16734424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Aug;1760(8):1192-201. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Expression, purification, and structural prediction of the Ets transcription
factor ERM.

Mauen S(1), Huvent I, Raussens V, Demonte D, Baert JL, Tricot C, Ruysschaert JM, 
Van Lint C, Moguilevsky N, de Launoit Y.

The PEA3 group within the Ets family comprises PEA3, ER81, and ERM, three
transcription factors of about 500 residues. These factors are highly conserved
in their ETS DNA-binding domain and in their two transcriptional activation
domains. They are involved in many developmental processes and regulate cancer
development via metastasis, as in the case of some breast tumors. Here, we
describe the oversynthesis of human ERM from a baculovirus expression vector in
Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) cells, and the subsequent purification and structural
characterization of this protein. Oversynthesis of ERM was confirmed by measuring
band intensities on SDS-PAGE gels and by Western blot analysis. Two-step
purification by affinity chromatography led to a highly stable protein.
Electromobility shift assays suggested that this purified protein is functional, 
since it recognizes specific Ets DNA-binding sites. We then used circular
dichroism and infrared spectrometry to perform a structural analysis of the
purified full-length ERM, and compared the results with those of current
structural prediction algorithms. Our study indicates that ERM contains a highly 
structured ETS-domain and suggests that each of the N- and C-terminal
transactivating domains also contains an alpha-helix. In contrast, the
250-residue central domain seems to have very little structure.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2006.03.007 
PMID: 16730909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Mol Biol. 2006 Jun 16;359(4):1137-49. Epub 2006 Apr 25.

Human transcription factors contain a high fraction of intrinsically disordered
regions essential for transcriptional regulation.

Minezaki Y(1), Homma K, Kinjo AR, Nishikawa K.

Erratum in
    J Mol Biol. 2006 Oct 13;363(1):309.

Human transcriptional regulation factors, such as activators, repressors, and
enhancer-binding factors are quite different from their prokaryotic counterparts 
in two respects: the average sequence in human is more than twice as long as that
in prokaryotes, while the fraction of sequence aligned to domains of known
structure is 31% in human transcription factors (TFs), less than half of that in 
bacterial TFs (72%). Intrinsically disordered (ID) regions were identified by a
disorder-prediction program, and were found to be in good agreement with
available experimental data. Analysis of 401 human TFs with experimental evidence
from the Swiss-Prot database showed that as high as 49% of the entire sequence of
human TFs is occupied by ID regions. More than half of the human TFs consist of a
small DNA binding domain (DBD) and long ID regions frequently sandwiching
unassigned regions. The remaining TFs have structural domains in addition to DBDs
and ID regions. Experimental studies, particularly those with NMR, revealed that 
the transactivation domains in unbound TFs are usually unstructured, but become
structured upon binding to their partners. The sequences of human and mouse TF
orthologues are 90.5% identical despite a high incidence of ID regions, probably 
reflecting important functional roles played by ID regions. In general ID regions
occupy a high fraction in TFs of eukaryotes, but not in prokaryotes. Implications
of this dichotomy are discussed in connection with their functional roles in
transcriptional regulation and evolution.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.04.016 
PMID: 16697407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2006 Jun;16(3):327-35. Epub 2006 May 2.

Structure of ribonuclease P--a universal ribozyme.

Torres-Larios A(1), Swinger KK, Pan T, Mondragón A.

Ribonuclease P (RNase P) is one of only two known universal ribozymes and was one
of the first ribozymes to be discovered. It is involved in RNA processing, in
particular the 5' maturation of tRNA. Unlike most other natural ribozymes, it
recognizes and cleaves its substrate in trans. RNase P is a ribonucleoprotein
complex containing one RNA subunit and as few as one protein subunit. It has been
shown that, in bacteria and in some archaea, the RNA subunit alone can support
catalysis. The structure and function of bacterial RNase P RNA have been studied 
extensively, but the detailed catalytic mechanism is not yet fully understood.
Recently, structures of one of the structural domains and of the entire RNA
component of RNase P from two different bacteria have been described. These
structures provide the first atomic-level information on the structural assembly 
of the RNA component, and the regions involved in substrate recognition and
catalysis. Comparison of these structures reveals a highly conserved core that
comprises two universally conserved structural modules. Interestingly, the same
structural core can be found in the context of different scaffolds.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.2006.04.002 
PMID: 16650980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cell Death Differ. 2007 Jan;14(1):128-36. Epub 2006 Apr 28.

Bim, Bad and Bmf: intrinsically unstructured BH3-only proteins that undergo a
localized conformational change upon binding to prosurvival Bcl-2 targets.

Hinds MG(1), Smits C, Fredericks-Short R, Risk JM, Bailey M, Huang DC, Day CL.

All BH3-only proteins, key initiators of programmed cell death, interact tightly 
with multiple binding partners and have sequences of low complexity, properties
that are the hallmark of intrinsically unstructured proteins (IUPs). We show,
using spectroscopic methods, that the BH3-only proteins Bim, Bad and Bmf are
unstructured in the absence of binding partners. Detailed sequence analyses are
consistent with this observation and suggest that most BH3-only proteins are
unstructured. When Bim binds and inactivates prosurvival proteins, most residues 
remain disordered, only the BH3 element becomes structured, and the short
alpha-helical molecular recognition element can be considered to behave as a
'bead on a string'. Coupled folding and binding is typical of many IUPs that have
important signaling roles, such as BH3-only proteins, as the inherent structural 
plasticity favors interaction with multiple targets. This understanding offers
promise for the development of BH3 mimetics, as multiple modes of binding are
tolerated.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401934 
PMID: 16645638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. IUBMB Life. 2006 Feb;58(2):107-9.

According to current textbooks, a well-defined three-dimensional structure is a
prerequisite for the function of a protein. Is this correct?

Dyson HJ(1), Wright PE.

DOI: 10.1080/15216540500484376 
PMID: 16608823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1936 Jul;22(7):439-47.

On the Structure of Native, Denatured, and Coagulated Proteins.

Mirsky AE(1), Pauling L.


PMCID: PMC1076802
PMID: 16577722 


22. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2006 Jul;5(7):1212-23. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Local flexibility in molecular function paradigm.

Bhalla J(1), Storchan GB, MacCarthy CM, Uversky VN, Tcherkasskaya O.

It is generally accepted that the functional activity of biological
macromolecules requires tightly packed three-dimensional structures. Recent
theoretical and experimental evidence indicates, however, the importance of
molecular flexibility for the proper functioning of some proteins. We examined
high resolution structures of proteins in various functional categories with
respect to the secondary structure assessment. The latter was considered as a
characteristic of the inherent flexibility of a polypeptide chain. We found that 
the proteins in functionally competent conformational states might be comprised
of 20-70% flexible residues. For instance, proteins involved in gene regulation, 
e.g. transcription factors, are on average largely disordered molecules with over
60% of amino acids residing in "coiled" configurations. In contrast, oxygen
transporters constitute a class of relatively rigid molecules with only 30% of
residues being locally flexible. Phylogenic comparison of a large number of
protein families with respect to the propagation of secondary structure
illuminates the growing role of the local flexibility in organisms of greater
complexity. Furthermore the local flexibility in protein molecules appears to be 
dependent on the molecular confinement and is essentially larger in extracellular
proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M500315-MCP200 
PMID: 16571897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Ernst Schering Res Found Workshop. 2006;(57):173-92.

Role of ubiquitin-like proteins in transcriptional regulation.

Hay RT(1).

Conjugation of ubiquitin-like proteins (Ubls) to components of the
transcriptional machinery represents an important mechanism to allow switching
between different activity states. While ubiquitin modification of transcription 
factors is associated with transcriptional activation, SUMO modification of
transcription factors is most often associated with transcriptional repression.
Recent experiments indicate that another Ubl, NEDD8, can also influence
transcription. One of the characteristics of Ubl modification is that the
biological consequences of conjugation do not appear proportionate to the small
fraction of substrate that is modified. The low steady state levels of
Ubl-modified substrates can be attributed to a highly dynamic situation in which 
proteins are conjugated to a particular Ubl only for the modification to be
removed by Ubl-specific proteases. It therefore appears that an unmodified
protein with a history of Ubl modification may have different properties from a
protein that never has been modified. Here the diverse effects of Ubl
modification are discussed and models proposed to explain Ubl actions.


PMID: 16568955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Biochemistry. 2006 Mar 28;45(12):3972-80.

Tracking the unfolding and refolding pathways of outer membrane protein porin
from Paracoccus denitrificans.

Sukumaran S(1), Hauser K, Maier E, Benz R, Mäntele W.

We have investigated outer membrane protein porin from Paracoccus denitrificans
for its stability against heat and pH. Pathways of unfolding and refolding have
been analyzed. Porin incubated at pH 12.5 and above undergoes a slow unfolding
into an unordered structure. The unfolded protein could be refolded into a
nativelike structure that is functionally active but with distinct deviation from
the native protein. This nativelike structure exhibited an entirely different
thermal stability. Although aggregation is normally considered a structural
"dead-end", the possibility of opening an aggregated porin and forming a
functionally active structure was analyzed here. Porin aggregates on heating
above 86.2 degrees C. Incubating the heat-aggregated protein at high pH (> or =
12.5) leads to a slow opening of the protein into an unordered structure. It was 
possible to refold this unordered protein into a trimeric nativelike structure
which was capable of forming active pores. However, the thermal stability of the 
refolded porin was unlike that of the native porin. To understand the basic
mechanism behind the unfolding processes, the protein was subjected to heating at
various pH values. It was observed that at pH > or = 12.5 the protein does not
aggregate upon heating; instead, it opens into an unordered structure. We
conclude that at high pH values, the electrostatic interactions of various amino 
acid residues are perturbed which leads to unfolding into an unordered structure.
This study shows for the first time an entirely new unfolding and refolding
pathway for porin.

DOI: 10.1021/bi052198b 
PMID: 16548524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 14;103(7):2109-14. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Solution structure of p53 core domain: structural basis for its instability.

Cañadillas JM(1), Tidow H, Freund SM, Rutherford TJ, Ang HC, Fersht AR.

The 25-kDa core domain of the tumor suppressor p53 is inherently unstable and
melts at just above body temperature, which makes it susceptible to oncogenic
mutations that inactivate it by lowering its stability. We determined its
structure in solution using state-of-the-art isotopic labeling techniques and NMR
spectroscopy to complement its crystal structure. The structure was very similar 
to that in the crystal but far more mobile than expected. Importantly, we were
able to analyze by NMR the structural environment of several buried polar groups,
which indicated structural reasons for the instability. NMR spectroscopy, with
its ability to detect protons, located buried hydroxyl and sulfhydryl groups that
form suboptimal hydrogen-bond networks. We mutated one such buried pair, Tyr-236 
and Thr-253 to Phe-236 and Ile-253 (as found in the paralogs p63 and p73), and
stabilized p53 by 1.6 kcal/mol. We also detected differences in the conformation 
of a mobile loop that might reflect the existence of physiologically relevant
alternative conformations. The effects of temperature on the dynamics of aromatic
residues indicated that the protein also experiences several dynamic processes
that might be related to the presence of alternative hydrogen-bond patterns in
the protein interior. p53 appears to have evolved to be dynamic and unstable.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0510941103 
PMCID: PMC1413739
PMID: 16461916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 14;103(7):2115-9. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Core domain interactions in full-length p53 in solution.

Veprintsev DB(1), Freund SM, Andreeva A, Rutledge SE, Tidow H, Cañadillas JM,
Blair CM, Fersht AR.

The tumor suppressor p53 consists of four 393-residue chains, each of which has
two natively unfolded (N- and C-terminal) and two folded (core and
tetramerization) domains. Their structural organization is poorly characterized
as the protein tends to aggregate, has defied crystallization, and is at the
limits of NMR studies. We first stabilized the protein by mutation to make it
more suitable for extended study and then acquired NMR spectra on full-length
protein and various combinations of shorter domain constructs. The NMR spectrum
(15N,1H transverse relaxation optimized spectroscopy) of full-length p53 was
close to that expected from the sum of the spectra of isolated individual
domains. However, patterns of changes in chemical shifts revealed unexpected
interactions between the core domains. We used the NMR data as constraints in
docking algorithms and found a previously uncharacterized self-complementary
surface for the association of core domains into dimers within the tetrameric
complex. Binding to DNA requires about a 70 degrees rotation to break those
subunit interactions and form the known protein:protein interface in the p53-DNA 
complex. We verified the interactions by the effects of mutation on DNA binding. 
Spectroscopic, biophysical, and mutational data conspired to give a picture of
the p53 tetramer as a dimer of loosely tethered core dimers of appropriate
symmetry to be poised to bind target DNA.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0511130103 
PMCID: PMC1413758
PMID: 16461914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Jan 10;34(1):305-12. Print 2006.

Serine/arginine-rich splicing factors belong to a class of intrinsically
disordered proteins.

Haynes C(1), Iakoucheva LM.

Serine/arginine-rich (SR) splicing factors play an important role in constitutive
and alternative splicing as well as during several steps of RNA metabolism.
Despite the wealth of functional information about SR proteins accumulated
to-date, structural knowledge about the members of this family is very limited.
To gain a better insight into structure-function relationships of SR proteins, we
performed extensive sequence analysis of SR protein family members and combined
it with ordered/disordered structure predictions. We found that SR proteins have 
properties characteristic of intrinsically disordered (ID) proteins. The amino
acid composition and sequence complexity of SR proteins were very similar to
those of the disordered protein regions. More detailed analysis showed that the
SR proteins, and their RS domains in particular, are enriched in the
disorder-promoting residues and are depleted in the order-promoting residues as
compared to the entire human proteome. Moreover, disorder predictions indicated
that RS domains of SR proteins were completely unstructured. Two different
classification methods, the charge-hydropathy measure and the cumulative
distribution function (CDF) of the disorder scores, were in agreement with each
other, and they both strongly predicted members of the SR protein family to be
disordered. This study emphasizes the importance of the disordered structure for 
several functions of SR proteins, such as for spliceosome assembly and for
interaction with multiple partners. In addition, it demonstrates the usefulness
of order/disorder predictions for inferring protein structure from sequence.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkj424 
PMCID: PMC1326245
PMID: 16407336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 17;281(11):7282-93. Epub 2006 Jan 6.

Mitochondrial and nuclear forms of Wnt13 are generated via alternative promoters,
alternative RNA splicing, and alternative translation start sites.

Struewing IT(1), Toborek A, Mao CD.

Wnt proteins play a key role in cell survival, cell proliferation, and cell fate 
during development. In endothelial cells, we identified the expression of Wnt13A,
Wnt13B, and Wnt13C mRNAs, which are generated by alternative promoters and
alternative RNA splicing. Wnt13A and Wnt13B proteins differ only in their
N-terminal sequences. Wnt13A, a typical Wnt, is N-glycosylated and localized in
the endoplasmic reticulum, with only a small fraction being secreted. Wnt13B
proteins appear as a protein doublet, L-Wnt13B and S-Wnt13B, which are neither
N-glycosylated nor secreted. Wnt13B proteins localized mainly to mitochondria, as
demonstrated using detection in mitochondria enriched fractions and
colocalization with Mitotracker and HSP60. A nuclear localization was also
observed in 20% of Wnt13B-expressing cells. Both the N-terminal hydrophobic
stretch (residues 1-17) and alpha-helix (residues 26-50) were the main
determinants for Wnt13B mitochondrial targeting. Serial deletions of Wnt13B
N-terminal sequences abolished its association with mitochondria and favored
instead a nuclear localization. The production of S-Wnt13B was independent of the
mitochondrial targeting but dependent on an alternative translation start
corresponding to Met(74) in L-Wnt13B. The same translation start is used in
Wnt13C mRNA to encode a protein undistinguishable from S-Wnt13B. S-Wnt13B when
expressed alone localized to the nucleus like Wnt13C, whereas L-Wnt13B localized 
to mitochondria. Wnt13 nuclear forms increased the beta-catenin/T-cell factor
activity in HEK293 cells and increased apoptosis in bovine aortic endothelial
cells. Altogether our results demonstrate that, in addition to alternative
promoters and RNA splicing, an alternative translation start in Wnt13B and Wnt13C
mRNAs increases the complexity of both human wnt13 expression and functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M511182200 
PMID: 16407296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2005;15(3):243-54.

Role of Runx proteins in chondrogenesis.

Yoshida CA(1), Komori T.

The mammalian RUNX protein family comprises three transcription factorsRUNX1,
RUNX2, and RUNX3. RUNX1 is involved in hematopoiesis, RUNX2 has multiple roles in
osteogenesis and RUNX3 is associated with neural and gut development. In
addition, all RUNX proteins are expressed during chondrogenesis, the process by
which cartilage is formed. This review describes the involvement of Runx proteins
in chondrogenesis, delineating their expression pattern and emphasizing their
active roles in mesenchymal condensation, chondrocyte proliferation, and
chondrocyte maturation. It also highlights how Runx proteins regulate
transcription of target genes and how Runx proteins are regulated in the
cartilaginous skeleton.


PMID: 16390320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biopolymers. 2006 Jul;82(4):344-8.

Structure-function correlation of outer membrane protein porin from Paracoccus
denitrificans.

Sukumaran S(1), Hauser K, Maier E, Benz R, Mäntele W.

Porins from outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria have a highly stable
structure. Our previous studies on porin from Paracoccus denitrificans showed
that the outer membrane protein porin is extremely stable toward heat, pH, and
chemical denaturants. The major question we have addressed in this paper is
whether the high stability of porin is a consequence of the beta-barrel structure
and whether it is required for its function. To explain this we have analyzed two
cases: first, we used porin wild-type and mutants and compared their structure
and function; second, we compared the activity of porin preheated to different
temperatures. Structural changes were monitored by infrared spectroscopy. We
observed that the structural stability of porin is not equivalent to functional
activity as minor alteration in the structure can result in drastic differences
in the activity of porins.

(c) 2006 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bip.20422 
PMID: 16345000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 17;281(7):4164-72. Epub 2005 Nov 29.

Beads-on-a-string, characterization of ETS-1 sumoylated within its flexible
N-terminal sequence.

Macauley MS(1), Errington WJ, Schärpf M, Mackereth CD, Blaszczak AG, Graves BJ,
McIntosh LP.

Sumoylation regulates the activities of several members of the ETS transcription 
factor family. To provide a molecular framework for understanding this
regulation, we have characterized the conjugation of Ets-1 with SUMO-1. Ets-1 is 
modified in vivo predominantly at a consensus sumoylation motif containing
Lys-15. This lysine is located within the unstructured N-terminal segment of
Ets-1 preceding its PNT domain. Using NMR spectroscopy, we demonstrate that the
Ets-1 sumoylation motif associates with the substrate binding site on the
SUMO-conjugating enzyme UBC9 (K(d) approximately 400 microm) and that the PNT
domain is not involved in this interaction. Ets-1 with Lys-15 mutated to an
arginine still binds UBC9 with an affinity similar to the wild type protein, but 
is no longer sumoylated. NMR chemical shift and relaxation measurements reveal
that the covalent attachment of mature SUMO-1, via its flexible C-terminal
Gly-97, to Lys-15 of Ets-1 does not perturb the structure or dynamic properties
of either protein. Therefore sumoylated Ets-1 behaves as "beads-on-a-string" with
the two proteins tethered by flexible polypeptide segments containing the
isopeptide linkage. Accordingly, SUMO-1 may mediate interactions of Ets-1 with
signaling or transcriptional regulatory macromolecules by acting as a
structurally independent docking module, rather than through the induction of a
conformational change in either protein upon their covalent linkage. We also
hypothesize that the flexibility of the linking polypeptide sequence may be a
general feature contributing to the recognition of SUMO-modified proteins by
their downstream effectors.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M510488200 
PMID: 16319071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2005 Dec;62(24):3014-38.

GTPase activating proteins: structural and functional insights 18 years after
discovery.

Scheffzek K(1), Ahmadian MR.

The conversion of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and
inorganic phosphate (P(i)) by guanine nucleotide binding proteins (GNBPs) is a
fundamental process in living cells and represents an important timer in
intracellular signalling and transport processes. While the rate of GNBP-mediated
GTP hydrolysis is intrinsically slow, direct interaction with GTPase activating
proteins (GAPs) accelerates the reaction by up to five orders of magnitude in
vitro. Eighteen years after the discovery of the first GAP, biochemical and
structural research has been accumulating evidence that GAPs employ a much wider 
spectrum of chemical mechanisms than had originally been assumed, in order to
regulate the chemical players on the catalytic protein-protein interaction stage.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-005-5136-x 
PMID: 16314935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 27;281(4):1853-6. Epub 2005 Nov 21.

Intrinsic protein disorder, amino acid composition, and histone terminal domains.

Hansen JC(1), Lu X, Ross ED, Woody RW.

Core and linker histones are the most abundant protein components of chromatin.
Even though they lack intrinsic structure, the N-terminal "tail" domains (NTDs)
of the core histones and the C-terminal tail domain (CTD) of linker histones bind
to many different macromolecular partners while functioning in chromatin. Here we
discuss the underlying physicochemical basis for how the histone terminal domains
can be disordered and yet specifically recognize and interact with different
macromolecules. The relationship between intrinsic disorder and amino acid
composition is emphasized. We also discuss the potential structural consequences 
of acetylation and methylation of lysine residues embedded in intrinsically
disordered histone tail domains.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.R500022200 
PMID: 16301309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Arthritis Res Ther. 2005;7(6):R1360-74. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Most nuclear systemic autoantigens are extremely disordered proteins:
implications for the etiology of systemic autoimmunity.

Carl PL(1), Temple BR, Cohen PL.

Patients with systemic autoimmune diseases usually produce high levels of
antibodies to self-antigens (autoantigens). The repertoire of common autoantigens
is remarkably limited, yet no readily understandable shared thread links these
apparently diverse proteins. Using computer prediction algorithms, we have found 
that most nuclear systemic autoantigens are predicted to contain long regions of 
extreme structural disorder. Such disordered regions would generally make poor B 
cell epitopes and are predicted to be under-represented as potential T cell
epitopes. Consideration of the potential role of protein disorder may give novel 
insights into the possible role of molecular mimicry in the pathogenesis of
autoimmunity. The recognition of extreme autoantigen protein disorder has led us 
to an explicit model of epitope spreading that explains many of the paradoxical
aspects of autoimmunity - in particular, the difficulty in identifying
autoantigen-specific helper T cells that might collaborate with the B cells
activated in systemic autoimmunity. The model also explains the experimentally
observed breakdown of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class specificity in
peptides associated with the MHC II proteins of activated autoimmune B cells, and
sheds light on the selection of particular T cell epitopes in autoimmunity.
Finally, the model helps to rationalize the relative rarity of clinically
significant autoimmunity despite the prevalence of low specificity/low avidity
autoantibodies in normal individuals.

DOI: 10.1186/ar1832 
PMCID: PMC1297582
PMID: 16277689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2005 Dec;15(6):690-9. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Regulation of apoptosis: uncovering the binding determinants.

Hinds MG(1), Day CL.

Eukaryotic cells use complex networks of signal transduction proteins to make
decisions about whether to differentiate, grow or die. In the case of apoptosis, 
which is responsible for the programmed death of unwanted or damaged cells in
multicellular organisms, recent structural, biochemical and cell-based assays
have enhanced our understanding of the mechanisms by which some of the key
proteins regulate this process. These studies have highlighted a critical role
for conformational change and the regulated formation of specific complexes that 
can either inhibit or stimulate apoptosis. In some cases, it is still not clear
what distinguishes inhibitory from activating complexes, but the value of a
structural understanding is highlighted by the success of recent structure-based 
drug discovery programs that have targeted these complexes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.2005.10.003 
PMID: 16263267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. FEBS J. 2005 Oct;272(20):5129-48.

Flexible nets. The roles of intrinsic disorder in protein interaction networks.

Dunker AK(1), Cortese MS, Romero P, Iakoucheva LM, Uversky VN.

Comment in
    FEBS J. 2005 Oct;272(20):5099-100.

Proteins participate in complex sets of interactions that represent the
mechanistic foundation for much of the physiology and function of the cell. These
protein-protein interactions are organized into exquisitely complex networks. The
architecture of protein-protein interaction networks was recently proposed to be 
scale-free, with most of the proteins having only one or two connections but with
relatively fewer 'hubs' possessing tens, hundreds or more links. The high level
of hub connectivity must somehow be reflected in protein structure. What
structural quality of hub proteins enables them to interact with large numbers of
diverse targets? One possibility would be to employ binding regions that have the
ability to bind multiple, structurally diverse partners. This trait can be
imparted by the incorporation of intrinsic disorder in one or both partners. To
illustrate the value of such contributions, this review examines the roles of
intrinsic disorder in protein network architecture. We show that there are three 
general ways that intrinsic disorder can contribute: First, intrinsic disorder
can serve as the structural basis for hub protein promiscuity; secondly,
intrinsically disordered proteins can bind to structured hub proteins; and
thirdly, intrinsic disorder can provide flexible linkers between functional
domains with the linkers enabling mechanisms that facilitate binding diversity.
An important research direction will be to determine what fraction of
protein-protein interaction in regulatory networks relies on intrinsic disorder.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04948.x 
PMID: 16218947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Jan 1;97(1):33-44.

The control of chondrogenesis.

Goldring MB(1), Tsuchimochi K, Ijiri K.

Chondrogenesis is the earliest phase of skeletal development, involving
mesenchymal cell recruitment and migration, condensation of progenitors, and
chondrocyte differentiation, and maturation and resulting in the formation of
cartilage and bone during endochondral ossification. This process is controlled
exquisitely by cellular interactions with the surrounding matrix, growth and
differentiation factors, and other environmental factors that initiate or
suppress cellular signaling pathways and transcription of specific genes in a
temporal-spatial manner. Vertebrate limb development is controlled by interacting
patterning systems involving prominently the fibroblast growth factor (FGF), bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP), and hedgehog pathways. Both positive and negative
signaling kinases and transcription factors, such as Sox9 and Runx2, and
interactions among them determine whether the differentiated chondrocytes remain 
within cartilage elements in articular joints or undergo hypertrophic maturation 
prior to ossification. The latter process requires extracellular matrix
remodeling and vascularization controlled by mechanisms that are not understood
completely. Recent work has revealed novel roles for mediators such as
GADD45beta, transcription factors of the Dlx, bHLH, leucine zipper, and AP-1
families, and the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway that interact at different stages
during chondrogenesis.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.20652 
PMID: 16215986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biochemistry. 2005 Sep 20;44(37):12454-70.

Coupled folding and binding with alpha-helix-forming molecular recognition
elements.

Oldfield CJ(1), Cheng Y, Cortese MS, Romero P, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Many protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions involve coupled
folding and binding of at least one of the partners. Here, we propose a protein
structural element or feature that mediates the binding events of initially
disordered regions. This element consists of a short region that undergoes
coupled binding and folding within a longer region of disorder. We call these
features "molecular recognition elements" (MoREs). Examples of MoREs bound to
their partners can be found in the alpha-helix, beta-strand, polyproline II
helix, or irregular secondary structure conformations, and in various mixtures of
the four structural forms. Here we describe an algorithm that identifies regions 
having propensities to become alpha-helix-forming molecular recognition elements 
(alpha-MoREs) based on a discriminant function that indicates such regions while 
giving a low false-positive error rate on a large collection of structured
proteins. Application of this algorithm to databases of genomics and functionally
annotated proteins indicates that alpha-MoREs are likely to play important roles 
protein-protein interactions involved in signaling events.

DOI: 10.1021/bi050736e 
PMID: 16156658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell Calcium. 2005 Sep-Oct;38(3-4):439-46.

Wnt and calcium signaling: beta-catenin-independent pathways.

Kohn AD(1), Moon RT.

Wnt signaling is a complex pathway in which beta-catenin is typically viewed as a
central mediator. However, within the past 15 years, at least three Wnt-mediated 
pathways have been proposed that function independent of beta-catenin. One
pathway involves activation of calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CamKII)
and protein kinase C (PKC). Another includes recruitment of heterotrimeric
GTP-binding proteins to activate phospholipase C (PLC) and phosphodiesterase
(PDE). Lastly, a pathway similar to the planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway in
Drosophila has been identified that activates the Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK)
and, perhaps, small GTP-binding proteins. Calcium has been implicated as an
important second messenger in all of these pathways. This review will focus on
the role of calcium in Wnt signaling and, as a consequence, provide a limited
overview of beta-catenin-independent Wnt signaling.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ceca.2005.06.022 
PMID: 16099039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Mol Recognit. 2005 Sep-Oct;18(5):343-84.

Showing your ID: intrinsic disorder as an ID for recognition, regulation and cell
signaling.

Uversky VN(1), Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK.

Regulation, recognition and cell signaling involve the coordinated actions of
many players. To achieve this coordination, each participant must have a valid
identification (ID) that is easily recognized by the others. For proteins, these 
IDs are often within intrinsically disordered (also ID) regions. The functions of
a set of well-characterized ID regions from a diversity of proteins are presented
herein to support this view. These examples include both more recently described 
signaling proteins, such as p53, alpha-synuclein, HMGA, the Rieske protein,
estrogen receptor alpha, chaperones, GCN4, Arf, Hdm2, FlgM, measles virus
nucleoprotein, RNase E, glycogen synthase kinase 3beta, p21(Waf1/Cip1/Sdi1),
caldesmon, calmodulin, BRCA1 and several other intriguing proteins, as well as
historical prototypes for signaling, regulation, control and molecular
recognition, such as the lac repressor, the voltage gated potassium channel, RNA 
polymerase and the S15 peptide associating with the RNA polymerase S-protein. The
frequent occurrence and the common use of ID regions in important protein
functions raise the possibility that the relationship between amino acid
sequence, disordered ensemble and function might be the dominant paradigm for the
molecular recognition that serves as the basis for signaling and regulation by
protein molecules.

DOI: 10.1002/jmr.747 
PMID: 16094605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Mol Biol. 2005 May 20;348(5):1211-24. Epub 2005 Mar 25.

Structure of a full length psychrophilic cellulase from Pseudoalteromonas
haloplanktis revealed by X-ray diffraction and small angle X-ray scattering.

Violot S(1), Aghajari N, Czjzek M, Feller G, Sonan GK, Gouet P, Gerday C, Haser
R, Receveur-Bréchot V.

Pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis is a psychrophilic Gram-negative bacterium
isolated in Antarctica, that lives on organic remains of algae. This bacterium
converts the cellulose, highly constitutive of algae, into an immediate nutritive
form by biodegrading this biopolymer. To understand the mechanisms of cold
adaptation of its enzymatic components, we studied the structural properties of
an endoglucanase, Cel5G, by complementary methods, X-ray crystallography and
small angle X-ray scattering. Using X-ray crystallography, we determined the
structure of the catalytic core module of this family 5 endoglucanase, at 1.4A
resolution in its native form and at 1.6A in the cellobiose-bound form. The
catalytic module of Cel5G presents the (beta/alpha)(8)-barrel structure typical
of clan GH-A of glycoside hydrolase families. The structural comparison of the
catalytic core of Cel5G with the mesophilic catalytic core of Cel5A from Erwinia 
chrysanthemi revealed modifications at the atomic level leading to higher
flexibility and thermolability, which might account for the higher activity of
Cel5G at low temperatures. Using small angle X-ray scattering we further explored
the structure at the entire enzyme level. We analyzed the dimensions, shape, and 
conformation of Cel5G full length in solution and especially of the linker
between the catalytic module and the cellulose-binding module. The results showed
that the linker is unstructured, and unusually long and flexible, a peculiarity
that distinguishes it from its mesophilic counterpart. Loops formed at the base
by disulfide bridges presumably add constraints to stabilize the most extended
conformations. These results suggest that the linker plays a major role in cold
adaptation of this psychrophilic enzyme, allowing steric optimization of
substrate accessibility.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2005.03.026 
PMID: 15854656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. FEBS J. 2005 May;272(9):2088-97.

Protein families and RNA recognition.

Chen Y(1), Varani G.

This minireview series examines the structural principles underlying the
biological function of RNA-binding proteins. The structural work of the last
decade has elucidated the structures of essentially all the major RNA-binding
protein families; it has also demonstrated how RNA recognition takes place. The
ribosome structures have further integrated this knowledge into principles for
the assembly of complex ribonucleoproteins. Structural and biochemical work has
revealed unexpectedly that several RNA-binding proteins bind to other proteins in
addition to RNA or instead of RNA. This tremendous increase in the structural
knowledge has expanded not only our understanding of the RNA recognition
principle, but has also provided new insight into the biological function of
these proteins and has helped to design better experiments to understand their
biological roles.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04650.x 
PMID: 15853794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2005 Feb;3(1):35-60.

Optimizing long intrinsic disorder predictors with protein evolutionary
information.

Peng K(1), Vucetic S, Radivojac P, Brown CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z.

Protein existing as an ensemble of structures, called intrinsically disordered,
has been shown to be responsible for a wide variety of biological functions and
to be common in nature. Here we focus on improving sequence-based predictions of 
long (>30 amino acid residues) regions lacking specific 3-D structure by means of
four new neural-network-based Predictors Of Natural Disordered Regions (PONDRs): 
VL3, VL3H, VL3P, and VL3E. PONDR VL3 used several features from a previously
introduced PONDR VL2, but benefitted from optimized predictor models and a
slightly larger (152 vs. 145) set of disordered proteins that were cleaned of
mislabeling errors found in the smaller set. PONDR VL3H utilized homologues of
the disordered proteins in the training stage, while PONDR VL3P used attributes
derived from sequence profiles obtained by PSI-BLAST searches. The measure of
accuracy was the average between accuracies on disordered and ordered protein
regions. By this measure, the 30-fold cross-validation accuracies of VL3, VL3H,
and VL3P were, respectively, 83.6 +/- 1.4%, 85.3 +/- 1.4%, and 85.2 +/- 1.5%. By 
combining VL3H and VL3P, the resulting PONDR VL3E achieved an accuracy of 86.7
+/- 1.4%. This is a significant improvement over our previous PONDRs VLXT (71.6
+/- 1.3%) and VL2 (80.9 +/- 1.4%). The new disorder predictors with the
corresponding datasets are freely accessible through the web server at
http://www.ist.temple.edu/disprot.


PMID: 15751111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Mar;6(3):197-208.

Intrinsically unstructured proteins and their functions.

Dyson HJ(1), Wright PE.

Many gene sequences in eukaryotic genomes encode entire proteins or large
segments of proteins that lack a well-structured three-dimensional fold.
Disordered regions can be highly conserved between species in both composition
and sequence and, contrary to the traditional view that protein function equates 
with a stable three-dimensional structure, disordered regions are often
functional, in ways that we are only beginning to discover. Many disordered
segments fold on binding to their biological targets (coupled folding and
binding), whereas others constitute flexible linkers that have a role in the
assembly of macromolecular arrays.

DOI: 10.1038/nrm1589 
PMID: 15738986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Curr Med Chem. 2005;12(4):471-81.

Conformationally restricted peptides as tools in opioid receptor studies.

Janecka A(1), Kruszynski R.

The discovery of endogenous opioid peptides with their limited receptor
selectivity more than two decades ago implicated their involvement in analgesia
and initiated efforts to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying their
action. Opioid peptides mediate their physiological and pharmacological effects
through three major opioid receptor types (mu, delta, kappa), but the role of
each of these receptors is not easy to distinguish. There has therefore, been an 
increasing need for potent and selective agonists and antagonists in this area.
The incorporation of conformational constraints into analogs of biologically
active peptides is a well-known approach for enhancing receptor selectivity and
modulating efficacy. Conformational restriction has proven a valuable means for
assessing disparities between the peptide binding characteristics at each of the 
opioid receptor types, since peptide analogs designed with appropriate
conformational constraints possess the ability to adopt the conformation required
for interaction at one receptor type but not another. In efforts to obtain better
conformational integrity various conformationally restricted analogs of
endogenous opioid peptides have been developed. In this paper we review the
development of opioid analogs whose conformation was restricted either globally
through different types of cyclization (such as amide bond formation, disulfide
and monosulfide bridges, carbonyl and amine bridges) or locally, through
incorporation of side-chain conformational constraints at a specific amino acid
residue by synthesizing cyclic amino acids or constraining torsion angles by
suitable substitutions. These two approaches have led to the development of
potent and very selective agonists and antagonists at all three opioid receptor
types.


PMID: 15720255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):16030-7. Epub 2005 Feb 9.

Structures of p53 cancer mutants and mechanism of rescue by second-site
suppressor mutations.

Joerger AC(1), Ang HC, Veprintsev DB, Blair CM, Fersht AR.

We have solved the crystal structures of three oncogenic mutants of the core
domain of the human tumor suppressor p53. The mutations were introduced into a
stabilized variant. The cancer hot spot mutation R273H simply removes an arginine
involved in DNA binding without causing structural distortions in neighboring
residues. In contrast, the "structural" oncogenic mutations H168R and R249S
induce substantial structural perturbation around the mutation site in the L2 and
L3 loops, respectively. H168R is a specific intragenic suppressor mutation for
R249S. When both cancer mutations are combined in the same molecule, Arg(168)
mimics the role of Arg(249) in wild type, and the wild type conformation is
largely restored in both loops. Our structural and biophysical data provide
compelling evidence for the mechanism of rescue of mutant p53 by intragenic
suppressor mutations and reveal features by which proteins can adapt to
deleterious mutations.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M500179200 
PMID: 15703170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Biochemistry. 2005 Feb 15;44(6):1989-2000.

Comparing and combining predictors of mostly disordered proteins.

Oldfield CJ(1), Cheng Y, Cortese MS, Brown CJ, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Intrinsically disordered proteins and regions carry out varied and vital cellular
functions. Proteins with disordered regions are especially common in eukaryotic
cells, with a subset of these proteins being mostly disordered, e.g., with more
disordered than ordered residues. Two distinct methods have been previously
described for using amino acid sequences to predict which proteins are likely to 
be mostly disordered. These methods are based on the net charge-hydropathy
distribution and disorder prediction score distribution. Each of these methods is
reexamined, and the prediction results are compared herein. A new prediction
method based on consensus is described. Application of the consensus method to
whole genomes reveals that approximately 4.5% of Yersinia pestis, 5% of
Escherichia coli K12, 6% of Archaeoglobus fulgidus, 8% of Methanobacterium
thermoautotrophicum, 23% of Arabidopsis thaliana, and 28% of Mus musculus
proteins are mostly disordered. The unexpectedly high frequency of mostly
disordered proteins in eukaryotes has important implications both for
large-scale, high-throughput projects and also for focused experiments aimed at
determination of protein structure and function.

DOI: 10.1021/bi047993o 
PMID: 15697224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biophys J. 2005 Apr;88(4):2823-32. Epub 2005 Jan 14.

Protein disorder: conformational distribution of the flexible linker in a
chimeric double cellulase.

von Ossowski I(1), Eaton JT, Czjzek M, Perkins SJ, Frandsen TP, Schülein M,
Panine P, Henrissat B, Receveur-Bréchot V.

The structural properties of the linker peptide connecting the cellulose-binding 
module to the catalytic module in bimodular cellulases have been investigated by 
small-angle x-ray scattering. Since the linker and the cellulose-binding module
are relatively small and cannot be readily detected separately, the conformation 
of the linker was studied by means of an artificial fusion protein, Cel6BA, in
which an 88-residue linker connects the large catalytic modules of the cellulases
Cel6A and Cel6B from Humicola insolens. Our data showed that Cel6BA is very
elongated with a maximum dimension of 178 A, but could not be described by a
single conformation. Modeling of a series of Cel6BA conformers with interdomain
separations ranging between 10 A and 130 A showed that good Guinier and P(r)
profile fits were obtained by a weighted average of the scattering curves of all 
the models where the linker follows a nonrandom distribution, with a preference
for the more compact conformers. These structural properties are likely to be
essential for the function of the linker as a molecular spring between the two
functional modules. Small-angle x-ray scattering therefore provides a unique tool
to quantitatively analyze the conformational disorder typical of proteins
described as natively unfolded.

DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.104.050146 
PMCID: PMC1305377
PMID: 15653742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Nature. 2005 Jan 13;433(7022):156-60.

Unexpected complexity of the Wnt gene family in a sea anemone.

Kusserow A(1), Pang K, Sturm C, Hrouda M, Lentfer J, Schmidt HA, Technau U, von
Haeseler A, Hobmayer B, Martindale MQ, Holstein TW.

The Wnt gene family encodes secreted signalling molecules that control cell fate 
in animal development and human diseases. Despite its significance, the evolution
of this metazoan-specific protein family is unclear. In vertebrates, twelve Wnt
subfamilies were defined, of which only six have counterparts in Ecdysozoa (for
example, Drosophila and Caenorhabditis). Here, we report the isolation of twelve 
Wnt genes from the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis, a species representing the
basal group within cnidarians. Cnidarians are diploblastic animals and the
sister-group to bilaterian metazoans. Phylogenetic analyses of N. vectensis Wnt
genes reveal a thus far unpredicted ancestral diversity within the Wnt family.
Cnidarians and bilaterians have at least eleven of the twelve known Wnt gene
subfamilies in common; five subfamilies appear to be lost in the protostome
lineage. Expression patterns of Wnt genes during N. vectensis embryogenesis
indicate distinct roles of Wnts in gastrulation, resulting in serial overlapping 
expression domains along the primary axis of the planula larva. This unexpectedly
complex inventory of Wnt family signalling factors evolved in early
multi-cellular animals about 650 million years (Myr) ago, predating the Cambrian 
explosion by at least 100 Myr (refs 5, 8). It emphasizes the crucial function of 
Wnt genes in the diversification of eumetazoan body plans.

DOI: 10.1038/nature03158 
PMID: 15650739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13779-83. Epub 2005 Jan 12.

Crystal structure of the virulence gene activator AphA from Vibrio cholerae
reveals it is a novel member of the winged helix transcription factor
superfamily.

De Silva RS(1), Kovacikova G, Lin W, Taylor RK, Skorupski K, Kull FJ.

AphA is a member of a new and largely uncharacterized family of transcriptional
activators that is required for initiating virulence gene expression in Vibrio
cholerae, the causative agent of the frequently fatal epidemic diarrheal disease 
cholera. AphA activates transcription by an unusual mechanism that appears to
involve a direct interaction with the LysR-type regulator AphB at the tcpPH
promoter. As a first step toward understanding the molecular basis for tcpPH
activation by AphA and AphB, we have determined the crystal structure of AphA to 
2.2 angstrom resolution. AphA is a dimer with an N-terminal winged helix DNA
binding domain that is architecturally similar to that of the MarR family of
transcriptional regulators. Unlike this family, however, AphA has a unique
C-terminal antiparallel coiled coil domain that serves as its primary
dimerization interface. AphA monomers are highly unstable by themselves and form 
a linked topology, requiring the protein to partially unfold to form the dimer.
The structure of AphA also provides insights into how it cooperates with AphB to 
activate transcription, most likely by forming a heterotetrameric complex at the 
tcpPH promoter.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413781200 
PMCID: PMC2652724
PMID: 15647287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Semin Immunol. 2005 Feb;17(1):51-64.

Multi-chain immune recognition receptors: spatial organization and signal
transduction.

Sigalov A(1).

Multi-chain immune recognition receptors (MIRRs) on T cells, B cells, mast cells 
and basophils function to transduce signals leading to a variety of biologic
responses. These receptors are complexes formed by the association of
immunoglobulin-like recognition subunits and signal-transducing subunits. How
extracellular ligand binding initiates intracellular signal transduction
processes is not clear, and little structural or biochemical information is
available for the spatiotemporal organization of this key event in immune cell
activation. Here, the current progress in studying this important aspect of
cellular signaling is reviewed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2004.09.003 
PMID: 15582488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2005;19(1):1-8.

Structural characterization of methionine and leucine enkephalins by
hydrogen/deuterium exchange and electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry.

Cai X(1), Dass C.

Conformational changes in two endogenous opioid active pentapeptides methionine
enkephalin (Met-enk) and leucine enkephalin (Leu-enk) induced by trifluoroethanol
(TFE) were identified using hydrogen/deuterium exchange (HDX), coupled with
electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometry. The exchange features in
individual amino acid residues were characterized by acquiring tandem mass
spectra of the deuterated peptides. The exact identity of the labile hydrogens
involved in HDX reveals that the monomer forms of both peptides adopt an unfolded
conformation in aqueous solvent, but prefer the 5-->2 beta-turn secondary
structure under the membrane-mimetic environment. The ESI mass spectra of Met-enk
and Leu-enk also reveal that the dimer structure of these peptides coexists with 
the monomer conformation. The extent of the dimer structure is dependent on the
peptide concentration and nature of the solvent. The non-polar solvents
facilitate the dimer formation.

DOI: 10.1002/rcm.1739 
PMID: 15568184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Development. 2004 Dec;131(24):6131-40. Epub 2004 Nov 17.

Molecular dissection of Pax6 function: the specific roles of the paired domain
and homeodomain in brain development.

Haubst N(1), Berger J, Radjendirane V, Graw J, Favor J, Saunders GF, Stoykova A, 
Götz M.

The transcription factor Pax6 plays a key role during development of various
organs, including the brain where it affects cell fate, cell proliferation and
patterning. To understand how Pax6 coordinates these diverse effects at the
molecular level, we examined the role of distinct DNA-binding domains of Pax6,
the homeodomain (HD), the paired domain (PD) and its splice variant (5a), using
loss- and gain-of-function approaches. Here we show that the PD is necessary for 
the regulation of neurogenesis, cell proliferation and patterning effects of
Pax6, since these aspects are severely affected in the developing forebrain of
the Pax6Aey18 mice with a deletion in the PD but intact homeo- and
transactivation domains. In contrast, a mutation of the HD lacking DNA-binding
(Pax64Neu) resulted in only subtle defects of forebrain development. We further
demonstrate distinct roles of the two splice variants of the PD. Retrovirally
mediated overexpression of Pax6 containing exon 5a inhibited cell proliferation
without affecting cell fate, while Pax6 containing the canonical form of the PD
lacking exon 5a affected simultaneously cell fate and proliferation. These
results therefore demonstrate a key role of the PD in brain development and
implicate splicing as a pivotal factor regulating the potent neurogenic role of
Pax6.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.01524 
PMID: 15548580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Mol Biol. 2004 Nov 19;344(2):395-407.

RNA tertiary structure and cooperative assembly of a large ribonucleoprotein
complex.

Recht MI(1), Williamson JR.

The mechanisms that govern the ordered assembly of multiprotein ribonucleoprotein
complexes are not well understood. The in vitro reconstitution of the small
subunit of the bacterial ribosome provides a tractable system for the detailed
study of ordered assembly. We present a quantitative thermodynamic description of
the hierarchical binding of ribosomal proteins to 16S rRNA during assembly of the
platform of the 30S ribosomal subunit. The binding of S8, S11, S15, and the
S6:S18 heterodimer to the central domain of 16S rRNA has been measured both
individually and in combination using isothermal titration calorimetry and gel
mobility shift assays. Both enthalpy and free energy measurements demonstrate the
cooperative binding of S15 and the S6:S18 heterodimer, but no cooperativity is
observed for either S8 or S11. The results define a thermodynamic framework that 
describes cooperative platform assembly.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.09.009 
PMID: 15522293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;5(11):908-19.

Strategies for RNA folding and assembly.

Schroeder R(1), Barta A, Semrad K.

RNA is structurally very flexible, which provides the basis for its functional
diversity. An RNA molecule can often adopt different conformations, which enables
the regulation of its function through folding. Proteins help RNAs reach their
functionally active conformation by increasing their structural stability or by
chaperoning the folding process. Large, dynamic RNA-protein complexes, such as
the ribosome or the spliceosome, require numerous proteins that coordinate
conformational switches of the RNA components during assembly and during their
respective activities.

DOI: 10.1038/nrm1497 
PMID: 15520810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Adv Protein Chem. 2004;68:147-69.

The structural basis for biological signaling, regulation, and specificity in the
growth hormone-prolactin system of hormones and receptors.

Kossiakoff AA(1).

The pituitary hormones growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL) and placental
lactogen (PL), are members of an extensive cytokine superfamily of hormones and
receptors that share many of the same general structure-function relationships in
expressing their biological activities. The biology of the pituitary hormones
involves a very sophisticated interplay of cross-reactivity and specificity.
Biological activity is triggered via a hormone-induced receptor homodimerization 
process that is regulated by tertiary features of the hormone. These hormones
have an asymmetric four alpha-helical bundle structure that gives rise to two
receptor binding sites that have distinctly different topographies and
electrostatic character. This feature plays an important role in the regulation
of these systems by producing binding surfaces with dramatically different
binding affinities to the receptor extracellular domains (ECD). As a consequence,
the signaling complexes for systems that activate through receptor
homodimerization are formed in a controlled sequential step-wise manner.
Extensive biochemical and biophysical characterization of the two
hormone-receptor interfaces indicate that the energetic properties of the two
binding sites are fundamentally different and that the receptor shows
extraordinary conformational plasticity to mate with the topographically
dissimilar sites on the hormone. An unexpected finding has been that the two
hormone binding sites are allosterically coupled; a certain set of mutations in
the higher affinity site can produce both conformational and energetic effects in
the lower affinity site. These effects are so large that at some level they must 
have played some role in the evolution of the molecule.

DOI: 10.1016/S0065-3233(04)68005-3 
PMID: 15500861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Trends Immunol. 2004 Nov;25(11):583-9.

Multichain immune recognition receptor signaling: different players, same game?

Sigalov AB(1).

DOI: 10.1016/j.it.2004.08.009 
PMID: 15489186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2004;20:781-810.

The Wnt signaling pathway in development and disease.

Logan CY(1), Nusse R.

Tight control of cell-cell communication is essential for the generation of a
normally patterned embryo. A critical mediator of key cell-cell signaling events 
during embryogenesis is the highly conserved Wnt family of secreted proteins.
Recent biochemical and genetic analyses have greatly enriched our understanding
of how Wnts signal, and the list of canonical Wnt signaling components has
exploded. The data reveal that multiple extracellular, cytoplasmic, and nuclear
regulators intricately modulate Wnt signaling levels. In addition,
receptor-ligand specificity and feedback loops help to determine Wnt signaling
outputs. Wnts are required for adult tissue maintenance, and perturbations in Wnt
signaling promote both human degenerative diseases and cancer. The next few years
are likely to see novel therapeutic reagents aimed at controlling Wnt signaling
in order to alleviate these conditions.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.20.010403.113126 
PMID: 15473860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell. 2004 Sep 24;15(6):999-1006.

Structural, biochemical, and functional analyses of CED-9 recognition by the
proapoptotic proteins EGL-1 and CED-4.

Yan N(1), Gu L, Kokel D, Chai J, Li W, Han A, Chen L, Xue D, Shi Y.

Programmed cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans is initiated by the binding of
EGL-1 to CED-9, which disrupts the CED-4/CED-9 complex and allows CED-4 to
activate the cell-killing caspase CED-3. Here we demonstrate that the C-terminal 
half of EGL-1 is necessary and sufficient for binding to CED-9 and for killing
cells. Structure of the EGL-1/CED-9 complex revealed that EGL-1 adopts an
extended alpha-helical conformation and induces substantial structural
rearrangements in CED-9 upon binding. EGL-1 interface mutants failed to bind to
CED-9 or to release CED-4 from the CED-4/CED-9 complex, and were unable to induce
cell death in vivo. A surface patch on CED-9, different from that required for
binding to EGL-1, was identified to be responsible for binding to CED-4. These
data suggest a working mechanism for the release of CED-4 from the CED-4/CED-9
complex upon EGL-1 binding and provide a mechanistic framework for understanding 
apoptosis activation in C. elegans.

Copyright 2004 Cell Press

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2004.08.022 
PMID: 15383288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Mol Biol. 2004 Sep 24;342(4):1305-24.

Conformational prerequisites for formation of amyloid fibrils from histones.

Munishkina LA(1), Fink AL, Uversky VN.

We demonstrate that bovine core histones are natively unfolded proteins in
solutions with low ionic strength due to their high net positive charge at pH
7.5. Using a variety of biophysical techniques we characterized their
conformation as a function of pH and ionic strength, as well as correlating the
conformation with aggregation and amyloid fibril formation. Tertiary structure
was absent under all conditions except at pH 7.5 and high ionic strength. The
addition of trifluoroethanol or high ionic strength induced significant
alpha-helical secondary structure at pH 7.5. At low pH and high salt
concentration, small-angle X-ray scattering and SEC HPLC indicate the histones
are present as a hexadecamer of globular subunits. The secondary structure at low
pH was independent of the ionic strength or presence of TFE, as judged by FTIR.
The data indicate that histones are able to adopt five different relatively
stable conformations; this conformational variability probably reflects, in part,
their intrinsically disordered structure. Under most of the conditions studied
the histones formed amyloid fibrils with typical morphology as seen by electron
microscopy. In contrast to most aggregation/amyloidogenic systems, the kinetics
of fibrillation showed an inverse dependence on histone concentration; we
attribute this to partitioning to a faster pathway leading to non-fibrillar
self-associated aggregates at higher protein concentrations. The rate of fibril
formation was maximal at low pH, and decreased to zero by pH 10. The kinetics of 
fibrillation were very dependent on the ionic strength, increasing with
increasing salt concentration, and showing marked dependence on the nature of the
ions; interestingly Gdn.HCl increased the rate of fibrillation, although much
less than NaCl. Different ions also differentially affected the rate of
nucleation and the rate of fibril elongation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.06.094 
PMID: 15351653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Mol Biol. 2004 Sep 17;342(3):801-11.

Regulation of DNA binding of p53 by its C-terminal domain.

Weinberg RL(1), Freund SM, Veprintsev DB, Bycroft M, Fersht AR.

The tumor suppressor p53 is a tetrameric multi-domain transcription factor. Its
C-terminal domain is thought to regulate the binding of its core domain to
specific recognition sequences in promoters. The mechanism of regulation by the
C-terminal domain and the role of its post-translational modification are
controversial. We have examined the binding of DNA in solution to a series of
unmodified p53 constructs that lack various domains. The specific DNA sequences
bind tightly to the core domain, irrespective of whether or not the C-terminal
domain is part of the construct. Unmodified p53 is accordingly an active DNA
binding protein. Non-specific DNA sequences do not inhibit directly the binding
of the specific sequences to the core but bind to the C terminus and inhibit p53 
via that binding mode. Using NMR, we identified the residues of the C terminus
that interact with the non-specific DNA. They include residues that are known to 
be modified post-translationally. Our data provide direct support for the
regulatory role of the C terminus in the activity of p53 and show that p53
containing the unmodified C terminus actively binds to short double-stranded DNA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.07.042 
PMID: 15342238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Bioinformatics. 2005 Jan 1;21(1):137-40. Epub 2004 Aug 13.

DisProt: a database of protein disorder.

Vucetic S(1), Obradovic Z, Vacic V, Radivojac P, Peng K, Iakoucheva LM, Cortese
MS, Lawson JD, Brown CJ, Sikes JG, Newton CD, Dunker AK.

The Database of Protein Disorder (DisProt) is a curated database that provides
structure and function information about proteins that lack a fixed
three-dimensional (3D) structure under putatively native conditions, either in
their entirety or in part. Starting from the central premise that intrinsic
disorder is an important structural class of protein and in order to meet the
increasing interest thereof, DisProt is aimed at becoming a central repository of
disorder-related information. For each disordered protein, the database includes 
the name of the protein, various aliases, accession codes, amino acid sequence,
location of the disordered region(s), and methods used for structural (disorder) 
characterization. If applicable, most entries also list the biological
function(s) of each disordered region, how each region of disorder is used for
function, as well as provide links to PubMed abstracts and major protein
databases.AVAILABILITY: www.disprot.org

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bth476 
PMID: 15310560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 8;279(41):43085-91. Epub 2004 Aug 7.

A disorder to order transition accompanies catalysis in retinaldehyde
dehydrogenase type II.

Bordelon T(1), Montegudo SK, Pakhomova S, Oldham ML, Newcomer ME.

Retinaldehyde dehydrogenase II (RalDH2) converts retinal to the transcriptional
regulator retinoic acid in the developing embryo. The x-ray structure of the
enzyme revealed an important structural difference between this protein and other
aldehyde dehydrogenases of the same enzyme superfamily; a 20-amino acid span in
the substrate access channel in retinaldehyde dehydrogenase II is disordered,
whereas in other aldehyde dehydrogenases this region forms a well defined wall of
the substrate access channel. We asked whether this disordered loop might order
during the course of catalysis and provide a means for an enzyme that requires a 
large substrate access channel to restrict access to the catalytic machinery by
smaller compounds that might potentially enter the active site and be
metabolized. Our experiments, a combination of kinetic, spectroscopic, and
crystallographic techniques, suggest that a disorder to order transition is
linked to catalytic activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M406139200 
PMID: 15299009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 1;279(40):41706-14. Epub 2004 Jul 29.

BBK32, a fibronectin binding MSCRAMM from Borrelia burgdorferi, contains a
disordered region that undergoes a conformational change on ligand binding.

Kim JH(1), Singvall J, Schwarz-Linek U, Johnson BJ, Potts JR, Höök M.

BBK32 is a fibronectin-binding lipoprotein on Borrelia burgdorferi, the causative
agent of Lyme disease. Analysis using secondary structure prediction programs
suggested that BBK32 is composed of two domains, an N-terminal segment lacking
well defined secondary structure and a C-terminal segment composed largely of
alpha-helices. Analysis of purified recombinant forms of the two domains by
circular dichroism spectroscopy, gel permeation chromatography, and intrinsic
viscosity determination were consistent with an N-terminal-extended, unstructured
segment and a C-terminal globular domain in BBK32. Solid phase binding
experiments suggest that the unstructured N-terminal domain binds fibronectin.
Analysis of changes in circular dichroism spectra of the N-terminal segment of
BBK32 upon binding of the N-terminal domain of fibronectin revealed an increase
in beta-sheet content in the complex. Hence, BBK32, which belongs to a different 
family of proteins and shows no overall sequence similarity with the fibronectin 
binding MSCRAMMs (microbial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix
molecules) of Gram-positive bacteria, binds fibronectin by a mechanism that is
reminiscent of the "tandem beta-zipper" previously demonstrated for the
fibronectin binding of streptococcal adhesins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M401691200 
PMID: 15292204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Bioinformatics. 2004 Dec 12;20(18):3302-7. Epub 2004 Jul 15.

Preferred in vivo ubiquitination sites.

Catic A(1), Collins C, Church GM, Ploegh HL.

MOTIVATION: The conjugation of ubiquitin to target molecules involves several
enzymatic steps. Little is known about the specificity of ubiquitination. How E3 
ligases select their substrate and which lysines are targeted for ubiquitin
conjugation is largely an enigma. The object of this study is to identify
preferred ubiquitination sites. Genetic approaches to study this question have
proven difficult, because of the redundancy of ligases and the lack of strictly
required motifs. However, a better understanding of acceptor site selection could
help to predict ubiquitination sites and clarify yet unsolved structure-function 
relationships of the transfer reaction.
RESULTS: In an effort to define preferences for ubiquitination, we systematically
analyzed structure and sequence of 135 known ubiquitination sites in 95 proteins 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The results show clear structural preferences for
ubiquitin ligation to target proteins, and compartment-specific amino acid
patterns in close proximity to the modified side chain.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~catic.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bth407 
PMID: 15256413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Aug;53(3):771-5.

What functions do linker histones provide?

Harvey AC(1), Downs JA.

Linker histones have long been known to facilitate chromatin condensation in
vitro. For many years, this activity led to speculation that these proteins
function as global repressors of transcription. However, work from numerous
systems has demonstrated that this is not the case, and that linker histones
appear to affect only the transcription of a small subset of genes, and, in fact,
act to activate as well as repress transcription. Furthermore, there is evidence 
that suggests that linker histones are not required for mitotic condensation. In 
this review, we focus on studies of biological functions of linker histones
primarily performed in unicellular eukaryotes. We highlight recent developments
pointing towards linker histone involvement in DNA repair and ageing, which raise
the possibility that the biological functions of linker histones are more varied 
than previously imagined.

Copyright 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04195.x 
PMID: 15255891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Biochemistry. 2004 Jul 20;43(28):9009-20.

Dynamic relationships among type IIa bacteriocins: temperature effects on
antimicrobial activity and on structure of the C-terminal amphipathic alpha helix
as a receptor-binding region.

Kaur K(1), Andrew LC, Wishart DS, Vederas JC.

Dynamic aspects of structural relationships among class IIa bacteriocins, which
are antimicrobial peptides from lactic acid bacteria (LAB), have been examined by
use of circular dichroism (CD), molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and activity
testing. Pediocin PA-1 is a potent class IIa bacteriocin, which contains a second
C-terminal disulfide bond in addition to the highly conserved N-terminal
disulfide bond. A mutant of pediocin PA-1, ped[M31Nle], wherein the replacement
of methionine by norleucine (Nle) gives enhanced stability toward aerobic
oxidation, was synthesized by solid-phase peptide synthesis to study the activity
of the peptide in relation to its structure. The secondary structural analysis
from CD spectra of ped[M31Nle], carnobacteriocin B2 (cbn B2), and leucocin A
(leuA) at different temperatures suggests that the alpha-helical region of these 
peptides is important for target recognition and activity. Using molecular
modeling and dynamic simulations, complete models of pediocin PA-1, enterocin P, 
sakacin P, and curvacin A in 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) were generated to
compare structural relationships among this class of bacteriocins. Their high
sequence similarity allows for the use of homology modeling techniques. Starting 
from homology models based on solution structures of leuA (PDB code 1CW6) and
cbnB2 (PDB code 1CW5), results of 2-4 ns MD simulations in TFE and water at 298
and 313 K are reported. The results indicate that these peptides have a common
helical C-terminal domain in TFE but a more variable beta sheet or coiled N
terminus. At elevated temperatures, pediocin PA-1 maintains its overall
structure, whereas peptides without the second C-terminal disulfide bond, such as
enterocin P, sakacin P, curvacin A, leuA, and cbnB2 experience partial disruption
of the helical section. Pediocin PA-1 and ped[M31Nle] were found to be equally
active at different temperatures, whereas the other peptides that lack the second
C-terminal disulfide bond are 30-50 times less antimicrobially potent at 310 K
(37 degrees C) than at 298 K (25 degrees C). These results indicate that the
structural changes in the helical region observed at elevated temperatures
account for the loss of activity of these peptides. The presence of C-terminal
hydrophobic residues on one side of the amphipathic helix in class IIa
bacteriocins is an important feature for receptor recognition and specificity
toward particular organisms. This study assists in the understanding of
structure-activity relationships in type IIa bacteriocins and demonstrates the
importance of the conserved C-terminal amphipathic alpha helix for activity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi036018e 
PMID: 15248758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Trends Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;14(7):377-85.

GAP control: regulating the regulators of small GTPases.

Bernards A(1), Settleman J.

The small GTPases of the Ras superfamily mediate numerous biological processes
through their ability to cycle between an inactive GDP-bound and an active
GTP-bound form. Among the key regulators of GTPase cycling are the
GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), which stimulate the weak intrinsic
GTP-hydrolysis activity of the GTPases, thereby inactivating them. Despite the
abundance of GAPs and the fact that mutations in GAP-encoding genes underlie
several human diseases, these proteins have received relatively little attention.
Recent studies have addressed the regulatory mechanisms that influence GAP
activity. So far, findings suggest that GAP activity is regulated by several
mechanisms, including protein-protein interactions, phospholipid interactions,
phosphorylation, subcellular translocation and proteolytic degradation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcb.2004.05.003 
PMID: 15246431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochemistry. 2004 Jun 22;43(24):7766-75.

PL-I of Spisula solidissima, a highly elongated sperm-specific histone H1.

Lewis JD(1), McParland R, Ausió J.

The major chromosomal protein of the mature sperm of the surf clam, Spisula
solidissima, is a histone H1-related protamine-like (PL-I) protein of low
electrophoretic mobility. We report here the complete sequence of two isoforms of
its encoding genes. These genes encode a protein of 453 and 454 amino acids,
respectively. The predicted mass of the larger isoforms (51,437 Da) was confirmed
using electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. The amino-terminal tail of the
S. solidissima PL-I is greatly elongated because of the presence of 39 tandem
hexapeptide repeats of the motif (K/R)KRSAS with a few semiconservative amino
acid substitutions. These repeats are very closely mirrored by their encoding DNA
sequence, which indicates that an expansion because of sequence duplication most 
likely occurred. The C-terminal domain consists of a histone H1-related core with
a predicted winged-helix tertiary structure, which is followed by an unstructured
lysine-rich tail. This information provides additional molecular support for the 
classification and underlying evolution of sperm nuclear basic proteins in
bivalve molluscs.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0360455 
PMID: 15196019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Mol Biol. 2004 Jun 25;340(1):141-77.

The roles of ribosomal proteins in the structure assembly, and evolution of the
large ribosomal subunit.

Klein DJ(1), Moore PB, Steitz TA.

The structures of ribosomal proteins and their interactions with RNA have been
examined in the refined crystal structure of the Haloarcula marismortui large
ribosomal subunit. The protein structures fall into six groups based on their
topology. The 50S subunit proteins function primarily to stabilize inter-domain
interactions that are necessary to maintain the subunit's structural integrity.
An extraordinary variety of protein-RNA interactions is observed. Electrostatic
interactions between numerous arginine and lysine residues, particularly those in
tail extensions, and the phosphate groups of the RNA backbone mediate many
protein-RNA contacts. Base recognition occurs via both the minor groove and
widened major groove of RNA helices, as well as through hydrophobic binding
pockets that capture bulged nucleotides and through insertion of amino acid
residues into hydrophobic crevices in the RNA. Primary binding sites on
contiguous RNA are identified for 20 of the 50S ribosomal proteins, which along
with few large protein-protein interfaces, suggest the order of assembly for some
proteins and that the protein extensions fold cooperatively with RNA. The
structure supports the hypothesis of co-transcriptional assembly, centered around
L24 in domain I. Finally, comparing the structures and locations of the 50S
ribosomal proteins from H.marismortui and D.radiodurans revealed striking
examples of molecular mimicry. These comparisons illustrate that identical RNA
structures can be stabilized by unrelated proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.03.076 
PMID: 15184028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004 Apr;11(4):358-64. Epub 2004 Mar 14.

p27 binds cyclin-CDK complexes through a sequential mechanism involving
binding-induced protein folding.

Lacy ER(1), Filippov I, Lewis WS, Otieno S, Xiao L, Weiss S, Hengst L, Kriwacki
RW.

p27 controls cell proliferation by binding and regulating nuclear
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). In addition, p27 interacts with other nuclear
and cytoplasmic targets and has diverse biological functions. We seek to
understand how the structural and dynamic properties of p27 mediate its several
functions. We show that, despite showing disorder before binding its targets, p27
has nascent secondary structure that may have a function in molecular
recognition. Binding to Cdk2-cyclin A is accompanied by p27 folding, and kinetic 
data suggest a sequential mechanism that is initiated by binding to cyclin A. p27
regulates CDK-cyclin complexes involved directly in cell cycle control and does
not interact with other closely related CDKs. We show that p27-cyclin
interactions are an important determinant of this specificity and propose that
the homologous cell cycle regulators p21 and p57 function by a similar
sequential, folding-on-binding mechanism.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb746 
PMID: 15024385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncogene. 2004 Mar 15;23(11):1958-71.

Ubiquitin-like protein activation.

Huang DT(1), Walden H, Duda D, Schulman BA.

Post-translational covalent attachment of ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins
(ubls) has emerged as a predominant cellular regulatory mechanism, with important
roles in controlling cell division, signal transduction, embryonic development,
endocytic trafficking and the immune response. Ubls function by remodeling the
surface of their target proteins, changing their target's half-life, enzymatic
activity, protein-protein interactions, subcellular localization or other
properties. At least 10 different ubiquitin-like modifications exist in mammals, 
and attachment of different ubls to a target leads to different biological
consequences. Ubl-conjugation cascades are initiated by activating enzymes, which
also coordinate the ubls with their downstream pathways. A number of biochemical 
and structural studies have provided insights into the mechanism of
ubl-activating enzymes and their roles in ubl conjugation cascades.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207393 
PMID: 15021884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Mol Biol. 2004 Mar 26;337(3):635-45.

Prediction and functional analysis of native disorder in proteins from the three 
kingdoms of life.

Ward JJ(1), Sodhi JS, McGuffin LJ, Buxton BF, Jones DT.

An automatic method for recognizing natively disordered regions from amino acid
sequence is described and benchmarked against predictors that were assessed at
the latest critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction
(CASP) experiment. The method attains a Wilcoxon score of 90.0, which represents 
a statistically significant improvement on the methods evaluated on the same
targets at CASP. The classifier, DISOPRED2, was used to estimate the frequency of
native disorder in several representative genomes from the three kingdoms of
life. Putative, long (>30 residue) disordered segments are found to occur in 2.0%
of archaean, 4.2% of eubacterial and 33.0% of eukaryotic proteins. The function
of proteins with long predicted regions of disorder was investigated using the
gene ontology annotations supplied with the Saccharomyces genome database. The
analysis of the yeast proteome suggests that proteins containing disorder are
often located in the cell nucleus and are involved in the regulation of
transcription and cell signalling. The results also indicate that native disorder
is associated with the molecular functions of kinase activity and nucleic acid
binding.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.02.002 
PMID: 15019783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Front Biosci. 2004 May 1;9:1433-49.

Cytokines and fever.

Conti B(1), Tabarean I, Andrei C, Bartfai T.

Cytokines are highly inducible, secreted proteins mediating intercellular
communication in the nervous and immune system. Fever is the multiphasic response
of elevation and decline of the body core temperature regulated by central
thermoregulatory mechanisms localized in the preoptic area of the hypothalamus.
The discovery that several proinflammatory cytokines act as endogenous pyrogens
and that other cytokines can act as antipyretic agents provided a link between
the immune and the central nervous systems and stimulated the study of the
central actions of cytokines. The proinflammatory cytokines interleukin 1 (IL-1),
interleukin 6 (IL-6) and the tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF) as well as the
antiinflammatory cytokines interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) and
interleukin 10 (IL-10) have been most investigated for their pyrogenic or
antipyretic action. The experimental evidence demonstrating the role of these
secreted proteins in modulating the fever response is as follows: 1) association 
between cytokine levels in serum and CSF and fever; 2) finding of the presence of
cytokine receptors on various cell types in the brain and demonstration of the
effects of pharmacological application of cytokines and of their neutralizing
antibodies on the fever response; 3) fever studies on cytokine- and cytokine
receptor- transgenic models. Studies on the peripheral and the central action of 
cytokines demonstrated that peripheral cytokines can communicate with the brain
in several ways including stimulation of afferent neuronal pathways and induction
of the synthesis of a non cytokine pyrogen, i.e. PGE2, in endothelial cells in
the periphery and in the brain. Cytokines synthesized in the periphery may act by
crossing the blood brain barrier and acting directly via neuronal cytokine
receptors. The mechanisms that ultimately mediate the central action of cytokines
and of LPS on the temperature-sensitive neurons in the preoptic hypothalamic
region involved in thermoregulation, directly or via second mediators, remain to 
be fully elucidated.


PMID: 14977558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biochemistry. 2004 Feb 24;43(7):2049-61.

Homooligomerization of the cytoplasmic domain of the T cell receptor zeta chain
and of other proteins containing the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation
motif.

Sigalov A(1), Aivazian D, Stern L.

Antigen receptors on T cells, B cells, mast cells, and basophils all have
cytoplasmic domains containing one or more copies of an immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM), tyrosine residues of which are
phosphorylated upon receptor engagement in an early and obligatory event in the
signaling cascade. How clustering of receptor extracellular domains leads to
phosphorylation of cytoplasmic domain ITAMs is not known, and little structural
or biochemical information is available for the ITAM-containing cytoplasmic
domains. Here we investigate the conformation and oligomeric state of several
immune receptor cytoplasmic domains, using purified recombinant proteins and a
variety of biophysical and biochemical techniques. We show that all of the
cytoplasmic domains of ITAM-containing signaling subunits studied are oligomeric 
in solution, namely, T cell antigen receptor zeta, CD3epsilon, CD3delta, and
CD3gamma, B cell antigen receptor Igalpha and Igbeta, and Fc receptor
FcepsilonRIgamma. For zeta(cyt), the oligomerization behavior is best described
by a two-step monomer-dimer-tetramer fast dynamic equilibrium with dissociation
constants in the order of approximately 10 microM (monomer-dimer) and
approximately 1 mM (dimer-tetramer). In contrast to the other ITAM-containing
proteins, Igalpha(cyt) forms stable dimers and tetramers even below 10 microM.
Circular dichroic analysis reveals the lack of stable ordered structure of the
cytoplasmic domains studied, and oligomerization does not change the
random-coil-like conformation observed. The random-coil nature of zeta(cyt) was
also confirmed by heteronuclear NMR. Phosphorylation of zeta(cyt) and
FcepsilonRIgamma(cyt) does not significantly alter their oligomerization
behavior. The implications of these results for transmembrane signaling and
cellular activation by immune receptors are discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi035900h 
PMID: 14967045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochemistry. 2004 Feb 24;43(7):1854-61.

NMR solution structure of a peptide from the mdm-2 binding domain of the p53
protein that is selectively cytotoxic to cancer cells.

Rosal R(1), Pincus MR, Brandt-Rauf PW, Fine RL, Michl J, Wang H.

We have recently found that a peptide from the mdm-2 binding domain of the p53
protein induced rapid membranolytic necrosis of a variety of different human
cancer cell lines. To determine the role of solution structure in this peptide's 
selective and rapid tumor membrane disruptive behavior, we have performed
two-dimensional NMR on a 32-residue sequence called PNC-27, in both an aqueous
cytosolic-like and a mixed organic membrane-mimetic solution environment. In an
aqueous milieu, PNC-27 contains three alpha-helical domains connected by loop
structures, forming an S shape, and another similar structure with less helical
structure. In a solution environment simulating a membrane, the helical domains
found in water increase in length, forming three classes of structures, all of
which form a U-shaped helix-coil-helix ensemble. In both solvent systems, this
peptide forms amphipathic structures such that its hydrophobic residues coalesce 
on one face while the polar residues aggregate on the opposite face. The ability 
to form these unique structures in these two solution environments may allow the 
PNC-27 peptide to selectively and rapidly disrupt cancer cell membranes.

DOI: 10.1021/bi035718g 
PMID: 14967026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 11;32(3):1037-49. Print 2004.

The importance of intrinsic disorder for protein phosphorylation.

Iakoucheva LM(1), Radivojac P, Brown CJ, O'Connor TR, Sikes JG, Obradovic Z,
Dunker AK.

Reversible protein phosphorylation provides a major regulatory mechanism in
eukaryotic cells. Due to the high variability of amino acid residues flanking a
relatively limited number of experimentally identified phosphorylation sites,
reliable prediction of such sites still remains an important issue. Here we
report the development of a new web-based tool for the prediction of protein
phosphorylation sites, DISPHOS (DISorder-enhanced PHOSphorylation predictor,
http://www.ist.temple. edu/DISPHOS). We observed that amino acid compositions,
sequence complexity, hydrophobicity, charge and other sequence attributes of
regions adjacent to phosphorylation sites are very similar to those of
intrinsically disordered protein regions. Thus, DISPHOS uses position-specific
amino acid frequencies and disorder information to improve the discrimination
between phosphorylation and non-phosphorylation sites. Based on the estimates of 
phosphorylation rates in various protein categories, the outputs of DISPHOS are
adjusted in order to reduce the total number of misclassified residues. When
tested on an equal number of phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated residues, the 
accuracy of DISPHOS reaches 76% for serine, 81% for threonine and 83% for
tyrosine. The significant enrichment in disorder-promoting residues surrounding
phosphorylation sites together with the results obtained by applying DISPHOS to
various protein functional classes and proteomes, provide strong support for the 
hypothesis that protein phosphorylation predominantly occurs within intrinsically
disordered protein regions.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh253 
PMCID: PMC373391
PMID: 14960716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):13018-26. Epub 2004 Jan 8.

The NMR-derived solution structure of a new cationic antimicrobial peptide from
the skin secretion of the anuran Hyla punctata.

Prates MV(1), Sforça ML, Regis WC, Leite JR, Silva LP, Pertinhez TA, Araújo AL,
Azevedo RB, Spisni A, Bloch C Jr.

Amphibian skin secretions constitute an important source of molecules for
antimicrobial drug research in order to combat the increasing resistance of
pathogens to conventional antibiotics. Among the various types of substances
secreted by the dermal granular amphibian glands, there is a wide range of
peptides and proteins, often displaying potent antimicrobial activities and
providing an effective defense system against parasite infection. In the present 
work, we report the NMR solution structure and the biological activity of a
cationic 14-residue amphiphilic alpha-helical polypeptide named Hylaseptin P1
(HSP1), isolated from the skin secretion of the hylid frog Hyla punctata. The
peptide antimicrobial activity was verified against Candida albicans,
Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, whereas no
significant lytic effect was detected toward red or white blood cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M310838200 
PMID: 14715660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Adv Cancer Res. 2003;89:1-34.

Mdm2: A regulator of cell growth and death.

Vargas DA(1), Takahashi S, Ronai Z.

The interplay between Mdm2 and p53 represents one of the better-known paradigms
of the relationship between an oncogene and a tumor suppressor gene. The Mdm2
protein is a key regulator of cell growth and death and plays a pivotal role in
the transformation of normal cells into tumor cells, the hallmark of an oncogene.
The primary role of Mdm2 under nonstressed conditions is to target the
degradation ofthe tumor suppressor protein p53. In response to stress, however,
p53 is not affected by Mdm2 and functions as a transcription factor that induces 
the transcription of Mdm2 as well as of genes involved in growth control or
apoptosis. The effect of Mdm2 on the regulation of cell growth and death depends 
on p53 but also on a growing number of p53-independent targets. This overview
summarizes our current understanding of Mdm2 and p53 regulation, function, and
interaction in normal and tumor states.


PMID: 14587869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Mol Biol. 2003 Oct 3;332(5):1131-41.

The N-terminal domain of p53 is natively unfolded.

Dawson R(1), Müller L, Dehner A, Klein C, Kessler H, Buchner J.

p53 is one of the key molecules regulating cell proliferation, apoptosis and
tumor suppression by integrating a wide variety of signals. The structural basis 
for this function is still poorly understood. p53 appears to exercise its
function as a modular protein in which different functions are associated with
distinct domains. Presumably, p53 contains both folded and partially structured
parts. Here, we have investigated the structure of the isolated N-terminal part
of p53 (amino acid residues 1-93) using biophysical techniques. We demonstrate
that this domain is devoid of tertiary structure and largely missing secondary
structure elements. It exhibits a large hydrodynamic radius, typical for unfolded
proteins. These findings suggest strongly that the entire N-terminal part of p53 
is natively unfolded under physiological conditions. Furthermore, the binding
affinity to its functional antagonist Mdm2 was investigated. A comparison of the 
binding of human Mdm2 to the N-terminal part of p53 and full-length p53 suggests 
that unfolded and folded parts of p53 function synergistically.


PMID: 14499615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Immunity. 2003 Sep;19(3):341-52.

The structure of a Bcl-xL/Bim fragment complex: implications for Bim function.

Liu X(1), Dai S, Zhu Y, Marrack P, Kappler JW.

After antigen-driven expansion, the majority of T cells involved in an immune
response die rapidly by apoptosis dependent on the Bcl-2 related proteins, Bim
and Bax or Bak. The details of how these proteins are activated and interact are 
still unclear. The crystal structure of mouse Bcl-x(L) bound to a long helical
fragment of Bim indicates that the structure of Bim is very different from
proteins with a Bcl-2-like fold and may leave the BH3 region of Bim
constitutively exposed. Based on the structural homology between Bcl-x(L) and
Bax, we predicted that binding of Bim to Bax would require displacement of the
Bax penultimate alpha helix. Consistent with this prediction, truncation of this 
short helix was required for Bim/Bax interaction and led to spontaneous
activation of Bax. Our results suggest a way in which both Bim and Bax/Bak might 
be required for activated T cell apoptosis.


PMID: 14499110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Science. 1957 Apr 12;125(3250):691-2.

Reductive cleavage of disulfide bridges in ribonuclease.

SELA M, WHITE FH Jr, ANFINSEN CB.


PMID: 13421663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Sep;33(9):901-10.

The histone-like C-terminal extension in ribosomal protein S6 in Aedes and
Anopheles mosquitoes is encoded within the distal portion of exon 3.

Hernandez VP(1), Higgins L, Schwientek MS, Fallon AM.

In eukaryotic cells, ribosomal protein S6 (RPS6) is the major phosphorylated
protein on the small ribosomal subunit. In the mosquitoes Aedes aegypti and Aedes
albopictus, the cDNA encoding RPS6 contains 300 additional nucleotides, relative 
to the Drosophila homolog. The additional sequence encodes a 100-amino acid,
lysine-rich C-terminal extension of the RPS6 protein with 42-49% identity to
histone H1 proteins from the chicken and other multicellular organisms. Using
mass spectrometry we now show that the C-terminal extension predicted by the cDNA
is present on RPS6 protein isolated from ribosomal subunits purified from Ae.
albopictus cells. To expand our analysis beyond the genus Aedes, we cloned the
rpS6 cDNA from an Anopheles stephensi mosquito cell line. The cDNA also encoded a
lysine-rich C-terminal extension. However, in An. stephensi rpS6 the extension
was approximately 70 amino acids longer than that in Ae. albopictus, and at the
nucleotide level, it most closely resembled histone H1 proteins from the
unicellular eukaryotes Leishmania and Chlamydomonas, and the bacterium Bordetella
pertussis. To examine how the histone-like C-terminal extension is encoded in the
genome, we used PCR-based approaches to obtain the genomic DNA sequence encoding 
Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus rpS6. The sequence encoding the histone-like
C-terminal extension was contiguous with upstream coding sequence within a single
open reading frame in Exon 3, indicating that the lysine-rich extension in
mosquito RPS6 is not the result of an aberrant splicing event. An in silico
investigation of the Anopheles gambiae genome based on the cDNA sequence from An.
stephensi allowed us to map the An. gambiae gene to chromosome 2R, to deduce its 
exon-intron organization, and to confirm that Exon 3 encodes a C-terminal
histone-like extension. Because the C-terminal extension is absent from
Drosophila melanogaster, we examined a partial cDNA clone from a Psychodid fly,
which shares a relatively recent common ancestor with the mosquitoes. The absence
of the C-terminal extension in the Psychodid rpS6 cDNA suggests that the unusual 
RPS6 structure is restricted to a relatively small group of flies in the
Nematocera.


PMID: 12915181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Science. 2003 Aug 8;301(5634):836-8.

Single molecule profiling of alternative pre-mRNA splicing.

Zhu J(1), Shendure J, Mitra RD, Church GM.

Alternative pre-messenger RNA splicing is an important mechanism for generating
protein diversity and may explain in part how mammalian complexity arises from a 
surprisingly small complement of genes. Here, we describe "digital polony exon
profiling,"a single molecule-based technology for studying complex alternative
pre-messenger RNA splicing. This technology allows researchers to monitor the
combinatorial diversity of exon inclusion in individual transcripts. A
minisequencing strategy provides single nucleotide resolution, and the digital
nature of the technology allows quantitation of individual splicing variants.
Digital polony exon profiling can be used to investigate the physiological and
pathological roles of alternately spliced messenger RNAs, as well as the
mechanisms by which these messenger RNAs are produced.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1085792 
PMID: 12907803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochem Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;81(3):131-40.

A haploid affair: core histone transitions during spermatogenesis.

Lewis JD(1), Abbott DW, Ausió J.

The process of meiosis reduces a diploid cell to four haploid gametes and is
accompanied by extensive recombination. Thus, the dynamics of chromatin during
meiosis are significantly different than in mitotic cells. As spermatogenesis
progresses, there is a widespread reorganization of the haploid genome followed
by extensive DNA compaction. It has become increasingly clear that the dynamic
composition of chromatin plays a critical role in the activities of enzymes and
processes that act upon it. Therefore, an analysis of the role of histone
variants and modifications in these processes may shed light upon the mechanisms 
involved and the control of chromatin structure in general. Histone variants such
as histone H3.3, H2AX, and macroH2A appear to play key roles in the various
stages of spermiogenesis, in addition to the specifically modulated acetylation
of histone H4 (acH4), ubiquitination of histones H2A and H2B (uH2A, uH2B), and
phosphorylation of histone H3 (H3p). This review will examine recent discoveries 
concerning the role of histone modifications and variants during meiosis and
spermatogenesis.

DOI: 10.1139/o03-045 
PMID: 12897846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Cell. 2003 Jul;12(1):5-14.

Pre-mRNA splicing: awash in a sea of proteins.

Jurica MS(1), Moore MJ.

What's in a spliceosome? More than we ever imagined, according to recent reports 
employing proteomics techniques to analyze this multi-megadalton machine. As of
1999, around 100 splicing factors were identified (Burge et al., 1999); however, 
that number has now nearly doubled due primarily to improved purification of
spliceosomes coupled with advances in mass spectrometry analyses of complex
mixtures. Gratifyingly, most of the previously identified splicing factors were
found in the recent mass spec studies. Nonetheless, the number of new proteins
emerging with no prior connection to splicing was surprising. Without functional 
validation, it would be premature to label these proteins as bona fide splicing
factors. Yet many were identified multiple times in complexes purified under
diverse conditions or from different organisms. Another recurring theme regards
the dynamic nature of spliceosomal complexes, which may be even more intricate
than previously thought.


PMID: 12887888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Trends Biochem Sci. 2003 Jul;28(7):361-8.

Conformational diversity and protein evolution--a 60-year-old hypothesis
revisited.

James LC(1), Tawfik DS.

DOI: 10.1016/S0968-0004(03)00135-X 
PMID: 12878003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2003 Jun;13(3):325-33.

Recent insights into the structure and function of the ribonucleoprotein enzyme
ribonuclease P.

Harris ME(1), Christian EL.

In bacteria, the tRNA-processing endonuclease ribonuclease P is composed of a
large ( approximately 400 nucleotide) catalytic RNA and a smaller ( approximately
100 amino acid) protein subunit that is essential for substrate recognition.
Current biochemical and biophysical investigations are providing fresh insights
into the modular architecture of the ribozyme, the mechanisms of substrate
specificity and the role of essential metal ions in catalysis. Together with
recent high-resolution structures of portions of the ribozyme, these findings are
beginning to reveal how the functions of RNA and protein are coordinated in this 
ribonucleoprotein enzyme.


PMID: 12831883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Mar 17;1603(2):47-82.

GAPs galore! A survey of putative Ras superfamily GTPase activating proteins in
man and Drosophila.

Bernards A(1).

Typical members of the Ras superfamily of small monomeric GTP-binding proteins
function as regulators of diverse processes by cycling between biologically
active GTP- and inactive GDP-bound conformations. Proteins that control this
cycling include guanine nucleotide exchange factors or GEFs, which activate Ras
superfamily members by catalyzing GTP for GDP exchange, and GTPase activating
proteins or GAPs, which accelerate the low intrinsic GTP hydrolysis rate of
typical Ras superfamily members, thus causing their inactivation. Two among the
latter class of proteins have been implicated in common genetic disorders
associated with an increased cancer risk, neurofibromatosis-1, and tuberous
sclerosis. To facilitate genetic analysis, I surveyed Drosophila and human
sequence databases for genes predicting proteins related to GAPs for Ras
superfamily members. Remarkably, close to 0.5% of genes in both species (173
human and 64 Drosophila genes) predict proteins related to GAPs for Arf, Rab,
Ran, Rap, Ras, Rho, and Sar family GTPases. Information on these genes has been
entered into a pair of relational databases, which can be used to identify
evolutionary conserved proteins that are likely to serve basic biological
functions, and which can be updated when definitive information on the coding
potential of both genomes becomes available.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science B.V.


PMID: 12618308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jan 1;31(1):365-70.

The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase and its supplement TrEMBL in 2003.

Boeckmann B(1), Bairoch A, Apweiler R, Blatter MC, Estreicher A, Gasteiger E,
Martin MJ, Michoud K, O'Donovan C, Phan I, Pilbout S, Schneider M.

The SWISS-PROT protein knowledgebase (http://www.expasy.org/sprot/ and
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/swissprot/) connects amino acid sequences with the current
knowledge in the Life Sciences. Each protein entry provides an interdisciplinary 
overview of relevant information by bringing together experimental results,
computed features and sometimes even contradictory conclusions. Detailed
expertise that goes beyond the scope of SWISS-PROT is made available via direct
links to specialised databases. SWISS-PROT provides annotated entries for all
species, but concentrates on the annotation of entries from human (the HPI
project) and other model organisms to ensure the presence of high quality
annotation for representative members of all protein families. Part of the
annotation can be transferred to other family members, as is already done for
microbes by the High-quality Automated and Manual Annotation of microbial
Proteomes (HAMAP) project. Protein families and groups of proteins are regularly 
reviewed to keep up with current scientific findings. Complementarily, TrEMBL
strives to comprise all protein sequences that are not yet represented in
SWISS-PROT, by incorporating a perpetually increasing level of mostly automated
annotation. Researchers are welcome to contribute their knowledge to the
scientific community by submitting relevant findings to SWISS-PROT at
swiss-prot@expasy.org.


PMCID: PMC165542
PMID: 12520024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2002 Aug;81(1-4):639-54.

Production of class II bacteriocins by lactic acid bacteria; an example of
biological warfare and communication.

Eijsink VG(1), Axelsson L, Diep DB, Håvarstein LS, Holo H, Nes IF.

Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) fight competing Gram-positive microorganisms by
secreting anti-microbial peptides called bacteriocins. Peptide bacteriocins are
usually divided into lantibiotics (class I) and non-lantibiotics (class II), the 
latter being the main topic of this review. During the past decade many of these 
bacteriocins have been isolated and characterized, and elements of the genetic
mechanisms behind bacteriocin production have been unravelled. Bacteriocins often
have a narrow inhibitory spectrum, and are normally most active towards closely
related bacteria likely to occur in the same ecological niche. Lactic acid
bacteria seem to compensate for these narrow inhibitory spectra by producing
several bacteriocins belonging to different classes and having different
inhibitory spectra. The latter may also help in counteracting the possible
development of resistance mechanisms in target organisms. In many strains,
bacteriocin production is controlled in a cell-density dependent manner, using a 
secreted peptide-pheromone for quorum-sensing. The sensing of its own growth,
which is likely to be comparable to that of related species, enables the
producing organism to switch on bacteriocin production at times when competition 
for nutrients is likely to become more severe. Although today a lot is known
about LAB bacteriocins and the regulation of their production, several
fundamental questions remain to be solved. These include questions regarding
mechanisms of immunity and resistance, as well as the molecular basis of
target-cell specificity.


PMID: 12448760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Adv Protein Chem. 2002;62:25-49.

Identification and functions of usefully disordered proteins.

Dunker AK(1), Brown CJ, Obradovic Z.


PMID: 12418100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 20;277(51):49488-94. Epub 2002 Oct 17.

PAX6, paired domain influences sequence recognition by the homeodomain.

Mishra R(1), Gorlov IP, Chao LY, Singh S, Saunders GF.

PAX6 functions as a transcription factor and has two DNA-binding domains, a
paired domain (PD) and a homeodomain (HD), joined by a glycine-rich linker and
followed by a proline-serine-threonine-rich (PST) transactivation region at the C
terminus. The mechanism of PAX6 function is not clearly understood, and few
target genes in vertebrates have been identified. In this report we described the
functional analyses of patient missense mutations from the paired domain region
of PAX6 and a paireddomain-less isoform (PD-less) of Pax6 that lacks the paired
domain and part of the glycine-rich linker. The PD-less was expressed in the
brain, eyes, and pancreas of mouse. The level of expression of this isoform was
relatively higher in brain. The mutation sites PAX6-L46R and -C52R were located
in the PD of PAX6 on either end of the 5a-polypeptide insert of the alternatively
spliced form of PAX6, PAX6-5a. Another PAX6 mutant V53L described in this report 
was adjacent to C52R. We created corresponding mutations in PAX6 and PAX6-5a, and
evaluated their transcriptional activation and DNA binding properties. The PD
mutants of PAX6 (L46R, C52R, and V53L) exhibited lower transactivation activities
and variable DNA binding ability than wild-type PAX6 with PD DNA-binding
consensus sequences. The mutated amino acids containing PAX6-5a isoforms showed
unexpected transactivation properties with a reporter containing HD DNA-binding
sequences. PAX6-5a-C52R, and -V53L showed lower transactivation activities, but
PAX6-5a-L46R had greater transactivation ability than PAX6-5a. The PD-less
isoform of Pax6 lost its transactivational ability but could bind to the HD
DNA-binding sequences. Functional analysis of the PD-less isoform of Pax6 as well
as findings related to missense mutations in the PD suggest that the PD of PAX6
is required for HD function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M206478200 
PMID: 12388550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Mol Biol. 2002 Oct 25;323(3):573-84.

Intrinsic disorder in cell-signaling and cancer-associated proteins.

Iakoucheva LM(1), Brown CJ, Lawson JD, Obradović Z, Dunker AK.

The number of intrinsically disordered proteins known to be involved in
cell-signaling and regulation is growing rapidly. To test for a generalized
involvement of intrinsic disorder in signaling and cancer, we applied a neural
network predictor of natural disordered regions (PONDR VL-XT) to four protein
datasets: human cancer-associated proteins (HCAP), signaling proteins (AfCS),
eukaryotic proteins from SWISS-PROT (EU_SW) and non-homologous protein segments
with well-defined (ordered) 3D structure (O_PDB_S25). PONDR VL-XT predicts >or=30
consecutive disordered residues for 79(+/-5)%, 66(+/-6)%, 47(+/-4)% and 13(+/-4)%
of the proteins from HCAP, AfCS, EU_SW, and O_PDB_S25, respectively, indicating
significantly more intrinsic disorder in cancer-associated and signaling proteins
as compared to the two control sets. The disorder analysis was extended to 11
additional functionally diverse categories of human proteins from SWISS-PROT. The
proteins involved in metabolism, biosynthesis, and degradation together with
kinases, inhibitors, transport, G-protein coupled receptors, and membrane
proteins are predicted to have at least twofold less disorder than regulatory,
cancer-associated and cytoskeletal proteins. In contrast to 44.5% of the proteins
from representative non-membrane categories, just 17.3% of the cancer-associated 
proteins had sequence alignments with structures in the Protein Data Bank
covering at least 75% of their lengths. This relative lack of structural
information correlated with the greater amount of predicted disorder in the HCAP 
dataset. A comparison of disorder predictions with the experimental structural
data for a subset of the HCAP proteins indicated good agreement between
prediction and observation. Our data suggest that intrinsically unstructured
proteins play key roles in cell-signaling, regulation and cancer, where coupled
folding and binding is a common mechanism.


PMID: 12381310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Trends Biochem Sci. 2002 Oct;27(10):527-33.

Intrinsically unstructured proteins.

Tompa P(1).

The recent suggestion that the classical structure-function paradigm should be
extended to proteins and protein domains whose native and functional state is
intrinsically unstructured has received a great deal of support. There is ample
evidence that the unstructured state, common to all living organisms, is
essential for basic cellular functions; thus it deserves to be recognized as a
separate functional and structural category within the protein kingdom. In this
review, recent findings are surveyed to illustrate that this novel but rapidly
advancing field has reached a point where these proteins can be comprehensively
classified on the basis of structure and function.


PMID: 12368089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Mol Biol. 2002 Oct 4;322(5):917-27.

p53 contains large unstructured regions in its native state.

Bell S(1), Klein C, Müller L, Hansen S, Buchner J.

The human tumor suppressor protein p53 is understood only to some extent on a
structural level. We performed a comprehensive biochemical and biophysical
structure-function analysis of p53 full-length protein and p53 fragments. The
analysis showed that p53 and the fragments investigated form stable functional
units. Full-length p53 and the tetrameric fragment N93p53 (residues 93-393) are, 
however, destabilized significantly compared to the monomeric core domain
(residues 94-312) and the monomeric fragment p53C312 (residues 1-312). At the
physiological temperature of 37 degrees C and in the absence of modifications or 
stabilizing partners, wild-type p53 is more than 50% unfolded correlating with a 
75% loss in DNA-binding activity. Furthermore the analysis of CD spectra revealed
that full-length p53 contains large unstructured regions in its N and C-terminal 
parts. Our results indicate that full-length p53 is a modular protein consisting 
of defined structured and unstructured regions. We propose that p53 belongs to
the growing family of loosely folded or partially unstructured native proteins.
The lack of a rigid structure combined with the low overall stability may allow
the physiological interaction of p53 with a multitude of partner proteins and the
regulation of its turnover.


PMID: 12367518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Oct 15;112(3):250-5.

Molecular basis of vertebrate limb patterning.

Tickle C(1).

Mechanisms of limb development are common to all higher vertebrates. The current 
understanding of how vertebrate limbs develop comes mainly from studies on chick 
embryos, which are classical models for experimental manipulation, and mouse
embryos, which can be genetically manipulated. Work on chick and mouse embryos is
often complementary and has direct implications for human limb development.
Analysis has moved to the molecular level, which allows direct links to genetics.
Even though genes involved in limb development have been discovered by basic
scientists through different routes to that taken by clinical geneticists, many
of the same genes have been identified. Thus, the fields of embryology and
clinical medicine increasingly converge. The next challenge will be to go back to
animal models to begin to dissect how particular gene mutations lead to specific 
limb phenotypes.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.10774 
PMID: 12357468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Dev Biol. 2002 Oct 1;250(1):168-80.

The role of the Ets domain transcription factor Erm in modulating differentiation
of neural crest stem cells.

Paratore C(1), Brugnoli G, Lee HY, Suter U, Sommer L.

The transcription factor Erm is a member of the Pea3 subfamily of Ets domain
proteins that is expressed in multipotent neural crest cells, peripheral neurons,
and satellite glia. A specific role of Erm during development has not yet been
established. We addressed the function of Erm in neural crest development by
forced expression of a dominant-negative form of Erm. Functional inhibition of
Erm in neural crest cells interfered with neuronal fate decision, while
progenitor survival and proliferation were not affected. In contrast, blocking
Erm function in neural crest stem cells did not influence their ability to adopt 
a glial fate, independent of the glia-inducing signal. Furthermore, glial
survival and differentiation were normal. However, the proliferation rate was
drastically diminished in glial cells, suggesting a glia-specific role of Erm in 
controlling cell cycle progression. Thus, in contrast to other members of the
Pea3 subfamily that are involved in late steps of neurogenesis, Erm appears to be
required in early neural crest development. Moreover, our data point to multiple,
lineage-specific roles of Erm in neural crest stem cells and their derivatives,
suggesting that Erm function is dependent on the cell intrinsic and extrinsic
context.


PMID: 12297104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Curr Biol. 2002 Aug 20;12(16):1395.

Phylogenetic analysis of the Wnt gene family. Insights from lophotrochozoan
members.

Prud'homme B(1), Lartillot N, Balavoine G, Adoutte A, Vervoort M.

The Wnt gene family encodes secreted signaling molecules that control cell fate
specification, proliferation, polarity, and movements during animal development. 
We investigate here the evolutionary history of this large multigenic family. Wnt
genes have been almost exclusively isolated from two of the three main
subdivisions of bilaterian animals, the deuterostomes (which include chordates
and echinoderms) and the ecdysozoans (e.g., arthropods and nematodes). However,
orthology relationships between deuterostome and ecdysozoan Wnt genes, and, more 
generally, the phylogeny of the Wnt family, are not yet clear. We report here the
isolation of several Wnt genes from two species, the annelid Platynereis
dumerilii and the mollusc Patella vulgata, which both belong to the third large
bilaterian clade, the lophotrochozoans (which constitute, together with
ecdysozoans, the protostomes). Multiple phylogenetic analyses of these sequences 
with a large set of other Wnt gene sequences, in particular, the complete set of 
Wnt genes of human, nematode, and fly, allow us to subdivide the Wnt family into 
12 subfamilies. At least nine of them were already present in the last common
ancestor of all bilaterian animals, and this further highlights the genetic
complexity of this ancestor. The orthology relationships we present here open new
perspectives for future developmental comparisons.


PMID: 12194820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochem Cell Biol. 2002;80(3):353-61.

Protamine-like proteins: evidence for a novel chromatin structure.

Lewis JD(1), Ausió J.

Protamine-like (PL) proteins are DNA-condensing proteins that replace
somatic-type histones during spermatogenesis. Their composition suggests a
function intermediate to that of histones and protamines. Although these proteins
have been well characterized at the chemical level in a large number of species, 
particularly in marine invertebrates, little is known about the specific
structures arising from their interaction with DNA. Speculation concerning
chromatin structure is complicated by the high degree of heterogeneity in both
the number and size of these proteins, which can vary considerably even between
closely related species. After careful examination and comparison of the protein 
sequences available to date for the PL proteins, we propose a model for a novel
chromatin structure in the sperm of these organisms that is mediated by
somatic-type histones, which are frequently found associated with these proteins.
This structure supports the concept that the PL proteins may represent various
evolutionary steps between a sperm-specific histone H1 precursor and true
protamines. Potential post-translational modifications and the control of PL
protein expression and deposition are also discussed.


PMID: 12123288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Trends Biochem Sci. 2002 Jul;27(7):327-9.

Wnt signal transduction: kinase cogs in a nano-machine?

Ding Y, Dale T.


PMID: 12114015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nature. 2002 Jun 27;417(6892):967-70. Epub 2002 Jun 9.

A large nucleolar U3 ribonucleoprotein required for 18S ribosomal RNA biogenesis.

Dragon F(1), Gallagher JE, Compagnone-Post PA, Mitchell BM, Porwancher KA, Wehner
KA, Wormsley S, Settlage RE, Shabanowitz J, Osheim Y, Beyer AL, Hunt DF, Baserga 
SJ.

Although the U3 small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA), a member of the box C/D class of
snoRNAs, was identified with the spliceosomal small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) over 30
years ago, its function and its associated protein components have remained more 
elusive. The U3 snoRNA is ubiquitous in eukaryotes and is required for nucleolar 
processing of pre-18S ribosomal RNA in all organisms where it has been tested.
Biochemical and genetic analyses suggest that U3 pre-rRNA base-pairing
interactions mediate endonucleolytic pre-rRNA cleavages. Here we have purified a 
large ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex from Saccharomyces cerevisiae that contains
the U3 snoRNA and 28 proteins. Seventeen new proteins (Utp1 17) and Rrp5 were
present, as were ten known components. The Utp proteins are nucleolar and
specifically associated with the U3 snoRNA. Depletion of the Utp proteins impedes
production of the 18S rRNA, indicating that they are part of the active pre-rRNA 
processing complex. On the basis of its large size (80S; calculated relative
molecular mass of at least 2,200,000) and function, this complex may correspond
to the terminal knobs present at the 5' ends of nascent pre-rRNAs. We have termed
this large RNP the small subunit (SSU) processome.

DOI: 10.1038/nature00769 
PMID: 12068309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Science. 2002 May 31;296(5573):1644-6.

The promise and perils of Wnt signaling through beta-catenin.

Moon RT(1), Bowerman B, Boutros M, Perrimon N.

Wnt pathways are involved in the control of gene expression, cell behavior, cell 
adhesion, and cell polarity. In addition, they often operate in combination with 
other signaling pathways. The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is the best studied of the
Wnt pathways and is highly conserved through evolution. In this pathway, Wnt
signaling inhibits the degradation of beta-catenin, which can regulate
transcription of a number of genes. Some of the genes regulated are those
associated with cancer and other diseases (for example, colorectal cancer and
melanomas). As a result, components of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway are promising
targets in the search for therapeutic agents. Information about Wnt pathways is
available both in canonical terms and at the species level. In addition to the
canonical Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, information is now available for Drosophila, 
Caenorhabditis elegans, and Xenopus. The STKE Connections Maps for these pathways
provide an important tool in accessing this large body of complex information.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1071549 
PMID: 12040179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Genomics. 2002 Jun;79(6):849-59.

Structure and evolution of neurexin genes: insight into the mechanism of
alternative splicing.

Tabuchi K(1), Südhof TC.

Neurexins are neuron-specific vertebrate proteins with hundreds of differentially
spliced isoforms that may function in synapse organization. We now show that
Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans express a single gene encoding
only an alpha-neurexin, whereas humans and mice express three genes, each of
which encodes alpha- and beta-neurexins transcribed from separate promoters. The 
neurexin genes are very large (up to 1.62 Mb), with the neurexin-3 gene occupying
almost 2% of human chromosome 14. Although invertebrate and vertebrate neurexins 
exhibit a high degree of evolutionary conservation, only vertebrate neurexins are
subject to extensive alternative splicing that uses mechanisms ranging from
strings of mini-exons to multiple alternative splice donor and acceptor sites.
Consistent with their proposed role in synapse specification, neurexins thus have
evolved from relatively simple genes in invertebrates to diversified genes in
vertebrates with multiple promoters and extensive alternative splicing.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/geno.2002.6780 
PMID: 12036300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biochemistry. 2002 May 28;41(21):6573-82.

Intrinsic disorder and protein function.

Dunker AK(1), Brown CJ, Lawson JD, Iakoucheva LM, Obradović Z.


PMID: 12022860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct. 2002;31:361-92. Epub 2001 Oct 25.

Conformational dynamics of the chromatin fiber in solution: determinants,
mechanisms, and functions.

Hansen JC(1).

Chromatin fibers are dynamic macromolecular assemblages that are intimately
involved in nuclear function. This review focuses on recent advances centered on 
the molecular mechanisms and determinants of chromatin fiber dynamics in
solution. Major points of emphasis are the functions of the core histone tail
domains, linker histones, and a new class of proteins that assemble
supramolecular chromatin structures. The discussion of important structural
issues is set against a background of possible functional significance.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.biophys.31.101101.140858 
PMID: 11988475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell Death Differ. 2002 May;9(5):505-12.

Keeping killers on a tight leash: transcriptional and post-translational control 
of the pro-apoptotic activity of BH3-only proteins.

Puthalakath H(1), Strasser A.

BH3-only proteins are structurally distant members of the Bcl-2 protein family
that trigger apoptosis. Genetic experiments have shown that these proteins are
essential initiators of programmed cell death in species as distantly related as 
mice and C. elegans. BH3-only proteins share with each other and with the
remainder of the Bcl-2 family only a nine amino acid BH3 (Bcl-2 Homology) region.
Mutational analyses have demonstrated that this domain is required for their
ability to bind to Bcl-2-like pro-survival proteins and to initiate apoptosis. So
far only one BH3-only protein, EGL-1, has been identified in C. elegans and it is
required for all developmentally programmed death of somatic cells in this
species. In contrast, mammals have at least 10 BH3-only proteins that differ in
their expression pattern and mode of activation. Studies in gene targeted mice
have indicated that different BH3-only proteins are required for the initiation
of distinct apoptotic stimuli. The pro-apoptotic activities of BH3-only proteins 
are stringently controlled by a variety of mechanisms. C. elegans egl-1 as well
as mammalian hrk/dp5, noxa, puma/bbc3 and bim/bod are regulated by a diverse
range of transcription factors. Certain BH3-only proteins, including Bad,
Bik/Nbk, Bid, Bim/Bod and Bmf, are restrained by post-translational modifications
that cause their sequestration from pro-survival Bcl-2 family members. In this
review we describe current knowledge of the functions and transcriptional as well
as post-translational control mechanisms of BH3-only proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/sj/cdd/4400998 
PMID: 11973609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Apr 1;30(7):1575-84.

An efficient algorithm for large-scale detection of protein families.

Enright AJ(1), Van Dongen S, Ouzounis CA.

Detection of protein families in large databases is one of the principal research
objectives in structural and functional genomics. Protein family classification
can significantly contribute to the delineation of functional diversity of
homologous proteins, the prediction of function based on domain architecture or
the presence of sequence motifs as well as comparative genomics, providing
valuable evolutionary insights. We present a novel approach called TRIBE-MCL for 
rapid and accurate clustering of protein sequences into families. The method
relies on the Markov cluster (MCL) algorithm for the assignment of proteins into 
families based on precomputed sequence similarity information. This novel
approach does not suffer from the problems that normally hinder other protein
sequence clustering algorithms, such as the presence of multi-domain proteins,
promiscuous domains and fragmented proteins. The method has been rigorously
tested and validated on a number of very large databases, including SwissProt,
InterPro, SCOP and the draft human genome. Our results indicate that the method
is ideally suited to the rapid and accurate detection of protein families on a
large scale. The method has been used to detect and categorise protein families
within the draft human genome and the resulting families have been used to
annotate a large proportion of human proteins.


PMCID: PMC101833
PMID: 11917018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Protein Sci. 2002 Apr;11(4):739-56.

Natively unfolded proteins: a point where biology waits for physics.

Uversky VN(1).

The experimental material accumulated in the literature on the conformational
behavior of intrinsically unstructured (natively unfolded) proteins was analyzed.
Results of this analysis showed that these proteins do not possess uniform
structural properties, as expected for members of a single thermodynamic entity. 
Rather, these proteins may be divided into two structurally different groups:
intrinsic coils, and premolten globules. Proteins from the first group have
hydrodynamic dimensions typical of random coils in poor solvent and do not
possess any (or almost any) ordered secondary structure. Proteins from the second
group are essentially more compact, exhibiting some amount of residual secondary 
structure, although they are still less dense than native or molten globule
proteins. An important feature of the intrinsically unstructured proteins is that
they undergo disorder-order transition during or prior to their biological
function. In this respect, the Protein Quartet model, with function arising from 
four specific conformations (ordered forms, molten globules, premolten globules, 
and random coils) and transitions between any two of the states, is discussed.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.4210102 
PMCID: PMC2373528
PMID: 11910019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 17;277(20):17863-70. Epub 2002 Mar 11.

Structural rearrangement of human lymphotactin, a C chemokine, under
physiological solution conditions.

Kuloğlu ES(1), McCaslin DR, Markley JL, Volkman BF.

NMR spectra of human lymphotactin (hLtn), obtained under various solution
conditions, have revealed that the protein undergoes a major conformational
rearrangement dependent on temperature and salt concentration. At high salt (200 
mm NaCl) and low temperature (10 degrees C), hLtn adopts a chemokine-like fold,
which consists of a three-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet and a C-terminal
alpha-helix (Kuloğlu, E. S., McCaslin, D. R., Kitabwalla, M., Pauza, C. D.,
Markley, J. L., and Volkman, B. F. (2001) Biochemistry 40, 12486-12496). We have 
used NMR spectroscopy, sedimentation equilibrium, and intrinsic fluorescence to
monitor the reversible conformational change undergone by hLtn as a function of
temperature and ionic strength. We have used two-, three- and four-dimensional
NMR spectroscopy of isotopically enriched protein samples to determine structural
properties of the conformational state stabilized at 45 degrees C and 0 mm NaCl. 
Patterns of NOEs and (1)H(alpha) and (13)C chemical shifts show that hLtn
rearranges under these conditions to form a four-stranded, antiparallel
beta-sheet with a pattern of hydrogen bonding that is completely different from
that of the chemokine fold stabilized at 10 degrees C and 200 mm NaCl. The
C-terminal alpha-helix observed at 10 degrees C and 200 mm NaCl, which is
conserved in other chemokines, is absent at 45 degrees C and no salt, and the
last 38 residues of the protein are completely disordered, as indicated by
heteronuclear (15)N-(1)H NOEs. Temperature dependence of the tryptophan
fluorescence of hLtn in low and high salt confirmed that the chemokine
conformation is stabilized by increased ionic strength. Sedimentation equilibrium
analytical ultracentrifugation showed that hLtn at 40 degrees C in the presence
of 100 mm NaCl exists mainly as a dimer. Under near physiological conditions of
temperature, pH, and ionic strength, both the chemokine-like and
non-chemokine-like conformations of hLtn are significantly populated. The
functional relevance of this structural interconversion remains to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M200402200 
PMCID: PMC4451178
PMID: 11889129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):329-39.

The sigma(70)-like motif: a eukaryotic RNA binding domain unique to a superfamily
of proteins required for ribosome biogenesis.

Wehner KA(1), Baserga SJ.

Little is understood about the role of nucleolar RNA binding proteins in ribosome
biogenesis, although there is a clear need for them based on the strict folding
requirements of the pre-rRNA. We have identified a superfamily of RNA binding
proteins whose members are required for different stages of ribosome biogenesis. 
The Imp4 superfamily is composed of five individual families (Imp4, Rpf1, Rpf2,
Brx1, and Ssf) that all possess the sigma(70)-like motif, a eukaryotic RNA
binding domain with prokaryotic origins. The Imp4 superfamily members associate
with RNAs that are consistent with their distinct roles in ribosome biogenesis
and suggest the mechanisms by which they function.


PMID: 11864606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2002 Feb;12(1):54-60.

Coupling of folding and binding for unstructured proteins.

Dyson HJ(1), Wright PE.

There are now numerous examples of proteins that are unstructured or only
partially structured under physiological conditions and yet are nevertheless
functional. Such proteins are especially prevalent in eukaryotes. In many cases, 
intrinsically disordered proteins adopt folded structures upon binding to their
biological targets. Many new examples of coupled folding and binding events have 
been reported recently, providing new insights into mechanisms of molecular
recognition.


PMID: 11839490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochemistry. 2002 Jan 22;41(3):752-9.

Functional consequences of preorganized helical structure in the intrinsically
disordered cell-cycle inhibitor p27(Kip1).

Bienkiewicz EA(1), Adkins JN, Lumb KJ.

p27(Kip1) contributes to cell-cycle regulation by inhibiting cyclin-dependent
kinase (Cdk) activity. The p27 Cdk-inhibition domain has an ordered conformation 
comprising an alpha-helix, a 3(10) helix, and beta-structure when bound to cyclin
A-Cdk2. In contrast, the unbound p27 Cdk-inhibition domain is intrinsically
disordered (natively unfolded) as shown by circular dichroism spectroscopy, lack 
of chemical-shift dispersion, and negative heteronuclear nuclear Overhauser
effects. The intrinsic disorder is not due to the excision of the Cdk-inhibition 
domain from p27, since circular dichroism spectra of the full-length protein are 
also indicative of a largely unfolded protein. Both the inhibition domain and
full-length p27 are active as cyclin A-Cdk2 inhibitors. Using circular dichroism 
and proline mutagenesis, we demonstrate that the unbound p27 Cdk-inhibition
domain is not completely unfolded. The domain contains marginally stable helical 
structure that presages the alpha-helix, but not the 3(10) helix, adopted upon
binding cyclin A-Cdk2. Increasing or reducing the stability of the partially
preformed alpha-helix in the isolated p27 domain with alanine or proline
substitutions did not affect formation of the p27-inhibited cyclin A-Cdk2 complex
in energetic terms. However, stabilization of the helix with alanine hindered
kinetically the formation of the inhibited complex, suggesting that p27 derives a
kinetic advantage from intrinsic structural disorder.


PMID: 11790096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Jan;269(1):2-12.

What does it mean to be natively unfolded?

Uversky VN(1).

Natively unfolded or intrinsically unstructured proteins constitute a unique
group of the protein kingdom. The evolutionary persistence of such proteins
represents strong evidence in the favor of their importance and raises intriguing
questions about the role of protein disorders in biological processes.
Additionally, natively unfolded proteins, with their lack of ordered structure,
represent attractive targets for the biophysical studies of the unfolded
polypeptide chain under physiological conditions in vitro. The goal of this study
was to summarize the structural information on natively unfolded proteins in
order to evaluate their major conformational characteristics. It appeared that
natively unfolded proteins are characterized by low overall hydrophobicity and
large net charge. They possess hydrodynamic properties typical of random coils in
poor solvent, or premolten globule conformation. These proteins show a low level 
of ordered secondary structure and no tightly packed core. They are very
flexible, but may adopt relatively rigid conformations in the presence of natural
ligands. Finally, in comparison with the globular proteins, natively unfolded
polypeptides possess 'turn out' responses to changes in the environment, as their
structural complexities increase at high temperature or at extreme pH.


PMID: 11784292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2002 Jan;4(1):1-10.

Structure and function of pore-forming beta-barrels from bacteria.

Delcour AH(1).

Crystallographic studies of the past ten years have revealed that many outer
membrane proteins and bacterial toxins are constructed on the beta-barrel motif. 
Two structural classes can be identified. The first class, represented by the
porins, includes monomeric or multimeric proteins where each beta-barrel is
formed from a single polypeptide. The second class features proteins where the
beta-barrel is itself a multimeric assembly, to which each subunit contributes a 
few beta-strands. In addition to structural investigations, much work has also
been devoted to the functional aspects of these proteins, and to the
relationships between structure and function. Here we present a review of the
structural and the functional properties of some of the best-studied examples of 
these various classes of proteins, namely the general-diffusion, specific and
ligand-gated porins, multidrug efflux proteins and the staphylococcal toxin
alpha-hemolysin.


PMID: 11763966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biophys J. 2002 Jan;82(1 Pt 1):345-56.

Salt-induced conformation and interaction changes of nucleosome core particles.

Mangenot S(1), Leforestier A, Vachette P, Durand D, Livolant F.

Small angle x-ray scattering was used to follow changes in the conformation and
interactions of nucleosome core particles (NCP) as a function of the monovalent
salt concentration C(s). The maximal extension (D(max)) of the NCP (145 +/- 3-bp 
DNA) increases from 137 +/- 5 A to 165 +/- 5 A when C(s) rises from 10 to 50 mM
and remains constant with further increases of C(s) up to 200 mM. In view of the 
very weak increase of the R(g) value in the same C(s) range, we attribute this
D(max) variation to tail extension, a proposal confirmed by simulations of the
entire I(q) curves, considering an ideal solution of particles with tails either 
condensed or extended. This tail extension is observed at higher salt values when
particles contain longer DNA fragments (165 +/- 10 bp). The maximal extension of 
the tails always coincides with the screening of repulsive interactions between
particles. The second virial coefficient becomes smaller than the hard sphere
virial coefficient and eventually becomes negative (net attractive interactions) 
for NCP(145). Addition of salt simultaneously screens Coulombic repulsive
interactions between NCP and Coulombic attractive interactions between tails and 
DNA inside the NCP. We discuss how the coupling of these two phenomena may be of 
biological relevance.

DOI: 10.1016/S0006-3495(02)75399-X 
PMCID: PMC1302474
PMID: 11751321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Biomacromolecules. 2001 Summer;2(2):538-40.

Effects of macromolecular crowding on the intrinsically disordered proteins c-Fos
and p27(Kip1).

Flaugh SL(1), Lumb KJ.

A number of biologically active proteins exhibit intrinsic structural disorder in
vitro under thermodynamically ideal conditions. In vivo, however, proteins exist 
in a crowded, thermodynamically nonideal environment. We tested the hypothesis
that intrinsically disordered proteins adopt stable structure under crowded
conditions in which excluded volume is predicted to stabilize compact, native
conformations. In the presence of macromolecular crowding agents, neither the
intrinsically disordered C-terminal activation domain of c-Fos nor the
kinase-inhibition domain of p27(Kip1) undergoes any significant conformational
change that is detected by changes in either circular dichroism or fluorescence
spectra. We conclude that molecular crowding effects are not necessarily
sufficient to induce ordered structure in intrinsically disordered proteins.


PMID: 11749217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Br J Cancer. 2001 Dec 14;85(12):1813-23.

Activation and activities of the p53 tumour suppressor protein.

Bálint E E(1), Vousden KH.

The p53 tumour suppressor protein inhibits malignant progression by mediating
cell cycle arrest, apoptosis or repair following cellular stress. One of the
major regulators of p53 function is the MDM2 protein, and multiple forms of
cellular stress activate p53 by inhibiting the MDM2-mediated degradation of p53. 
Mutations in p53, or disruption of the pathways that allow activation of p53,
seem to be a general feature of all cancers. Here we review recent advances in
our understanding of the pathways that regulate p53 and the pathways that are
induced by p53, as well as their implications for cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1054/bjoc.2001.2128 
PMCID: PMC2364002
PMID: 11747320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Proteins. 2002 Jan 1;46(1):1-7.

Intrinsic structural disorder and sequence features of the cell cycle inhibitor
p57Kip2.

Adkins JN(1), Lumb KJ.

The cell cycle inhibitor p57Kip2 induces cell cycle arrest by inhibiting the
activity of cyclin-dependent kinases. p57, although active as a cyclin A-CDK2
inhibitor, is largely unfolded or intrinsically disordered as shown by circular
dichroism and fluorescence spectra characteristic of an unfolded protein and a
hydrodynamic radius consistent with an unfolded structure. In addition, the
N-terminal domain of p57 is both functionally independent as a cyclin A-CDK2
inhibitor and unstructured, as demonstrated by circular dichroism and
fluorescence spectra indicative of unfolded proteins, a lack of 1H chemical shift
dispersion and a hydrodynamic radius consistent with a highly unfolded structure.
The amino acid compositions of full-length p57 and the excised QT domain of p57
exhibit significant deviations from the average composition of globular proteins 
that are consistent with the observed intrinsic disorder. However, the amino acid
composition of the CDK inhibition domain of p57 does not exhibit such a striking 
deviation from the average values observed for proteins, implying that a general 
low level of hydrophobicity, rather than depletion or enrichment in specific
amino acids, contributes to the intrinsic disorder of the excised p57 CDK
inhibition domain.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.


PMID: 11746698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10139-49. Epub 2001 Dec 12.

Characterization of Glis2, a novel gene encoding a Gli-related, Krüppel-like
transcription factor with transactivation and repressor functions. Roles in
kidney development and neurogenesis.

Zhang F(1), Nakanishi G, Kurebayashi S, Yoshino K, Perantoni A, Kim YS, Jetten
AM.

In this study, we describe the characterization of a gene encoding a novel
Krüppel-like protein, named Glis2. Glis2 encodes a relatively proline-rich, basic
55.8-kDa protein. Its five tandem Cys(2)-His(2) zinc finger motifs exhibit the
highest homology to those of members of the Gli and Zic subfamilies of
Krüppel-like proteins. Confocal microscopic analysis demonstrated that Glis2
localizes to the nucleus. Analysis of the genomic structure of the Glis2 gene
showed that it is composed of 6 exons separated by 5 introns spanning a genomic
region of more than 7.5 kb. Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapped the mouse
Glis2 gene to chromosome 16A3-B1. Northern blot analysis showed that the Glis2
gene encodes a 3.8-kb transcript that is most abundant in adult mouse kidney. By 
in situ hybridization, expression was localized to somites and neural tube, and
during metanephric development predominantly to the ureteric bud, precursor of
the collecting duct, and inductor of nephronic tubule formation. One-hybrid
analysis using Glis2 deletion mutants identified a novel activation function (AF)
at the N terminus. The activation of transcription through this AF domain was
totally suppressed by two repressor functions just downstream from the AF. One of
the repressor functions is contained within the first zinc finger motif. The
level of transcriptional activation and repression varied with the cell line
tested, which might be due to differences in cell type-specific expression of
co-activators and co-repressors. Our results suggest that Glis2 behaves as a
bifunctional transcriptional regulator. Both the activation and repressor
functions may play an important role in the regulation of gene expression during 
embryonic development.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M108062200 
PMID: 11741991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Genome Inform Ser Workshop Genome Inform. 2000;11:161-71.

Intrinsic protein disorder in complete genomes.

Dunker AK(1), Obradovic Z, Romero P, Garner EC, Brown CJ.

Intrinsic protein disorder refers to segments or to whole proteins that fail to
fold completely on their own. Here we predicted disorder on protein sequences
from 34 genomes, including 22 bacteria, 7 archaea, and 5 eucaryotes. Predicted
disordered segments > or = 50, > or = 40, and > or = 30 in length were determined
as well as proteins estimated to be wholly disordered. The five eucaryotes were
separated from bacteria and archaea by having the highest percentages of
sequences predicted to have disordered segments > or = 50 in length: from 25% for
Plasmodium to 41% for Drosophila. Estimates of wholly disordered proteins in the 
bacteria ranged from 1% to 8%, averaging to 3 +/- 2%, estimates in various
archaea ranged from 2 to 11%, plus an apparently anomalous 18%, averaging to 7
+/- 5% that drops to 5 +/- 3% if the high value is discarded. Estimates in the 5 
eucarya ranged from 3 to 17%. The putative wholly disordered proteins were often 
ribosomal proteins, but in addition about equal numbers were of known and unknown
function. Overall, intrinsic disorder appears to be a common, with eucaryotes
perhaps having a higher percentage of native disorder than archaea or bacteria.


PMID: 11700597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nat Biotechnol. 2001 Sep;19(9):805-6.

The protein trinity--linking function and disorder.

Dunker AK(1), Obradovic Z.

DOI: 10.1038/nbt0901-805 
PMID: 11533628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Sep;8(9):756-60.

Latent and active p53 are identical in conformation.

Ayed A(1), Mulder FA, Yi GS, Lu Y, Kay LE, Arrowsmith CH.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Sep;8(9):730-2.

p53 is a nuclear phosphoprotein that regulates cellular fate after genotoxic
stress through its role as a transcriptional regulator of genes involved in cell 
cycle control and apoptosis. The C-terminal region of p53 is known to negatively 
regulate sequence specific DNA-binding of p53; modifications to the C-terminus
relieve this inhibition. Two models have been proposed to explain this latency:
(i) an allosteric model in which the C-terminal domain interacts with another
domain of p53 or (ii) a competitive model in which the C-terminal and the core
domains compete for DNA binding. We have characterized latent and active forms of
dimeric p53 using gel mobility shift assays and NMR spectroscopy. We show on the 
basis of chemical shifts that dimeric p53 both containing and lacking the
C-terminal domain are identical in conformation and that the C-terminus does not 
interact with other p53 domains. Similarly, NMR spectra of isolated core and
tetramerization domains confirm a modular p53 architecture. The data presented
here rule out an allosteric model for the regulation of p53.

DOI: 10.1038/nsb0901-756 
PMID: 11524676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cell. 2001 Jun 15;105(6):721-32.

Crystal structure of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta: structural basis for
phosphate-primed substrate specificity and autoinhibition.

Dajani R(1), Fraser E, Roe SM, Young N, Good V, Dale TC, Pearl LH.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3 beta) plays a key role in insulin and Wnt
signaling, phosphorylating downstream targets by default, and becoming inhibited 
following the extracellular signaling event. The crystal structure of human GSK3 
beta shows a catalytically active conformation in the absence of
activation-segment phosphorylation, with the sulphonate of a buffer molecule
bridging the activation-segment and N-terminal domain in the same way as the
phosphate group of the activation-segment phospho-Ser/Thr in other kinases. The
location of this oxyanion binding site in the substrate binding cleft indicates
direct coupling of P+4 phosphate-primed substrate binding and catalytic
activation, explains the ability of GSK3 beta to processively hyperphosphorylate 
substrates with Ser/Thr pentad-repeats, and suggests a mechanism for
autoinhibition in which the phosphorylated N terminus binds as a competitive
pseudosubstrate with phospho-Ser 9 occupying the P+4 site.


PMID: 11440715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biochemistry. 2001 Jul 10;40(27):7947-56.

Current topics in RNA-protein recognition: control of specificity and biological 
function through induced fit and conformational capture.

Leulliot N(1), Varani G.


PMID: 11434763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;2(1):21-32.

Mitotic kinases as regulators of cell division and its checkpoints.

Nigg EA(1).

Mitosis and cytokinesis are undoubtedly the most spectacular parts of the cell
cycle. Errors in the choreography of these processes can lead to aneuploidy or
genetic instability, fostering cell death or disease. Here, I give an overview of
the many mitotic kinases that regulate cell division and the fidelity of
chromosome transmission.

DOI: 10.1038/35048096 
PMID: 11413462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 May 28;1519(1-2):13-29.

HMGI/Y proteins: flexible regulators of transcription and chromatin structure.

Reeves R(1), Beckerbauer L.

The mammalian HMGI/Y (HMGA) non-histone proteins participate in a wide variety of
cellular processes including regulation of inducible gene transcription,
integration of retroviruses into chromosomes and the induction of neoplastic
transformation and promotion of metastatic progression of cancer cells. Recent
advances have contributed greatly to our understanding of how the HMGI/Y proteins
participate in the molecular mechanisms underlying these biological events. All
members of the HMGI/Y family of 'high mobility group' proteins are characterized 
by the presence of multiple copies of a conserved DNA-binding peptide motif
called the 'AT hook' that preferentially binds to the narrow minor groove of
stretches of AT-rich sequence. The mammalian HMGI/Y proteins have little, if any,
secondary structure in solution but assume distinct conformations when bound to
substrates such as DNA or other proteins. Their intrinsic flexibility allows the 
HMGI/Y proteins to participate in specific protein-DNA and protein-protein
interactions that induce both structural changes in chromatin substrates and the 
formation of stereospecific complexes called 'enhanceosomes' on the
promoter/enhancer regions of genes whose transcription they regulate. The
formation of such regulatory complexes is characterized by reciprocal inductions 
of conformational changes in both the HMGI/Y proteins themselves and in their
interacting substrates. It may well be that the inherent flexibility of the
HMGI/Y proteins, combined with their ability to undergo reversible
disordered-to-ordered structural transitions, has been a significant factor in
the evolutionary selection of these proteins for their functional role(s) in
cells.


PMID: 11406267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Mol Graph Model. 2001;19(1):26-59.

Intrinsically disordered protein.

Dunker AK(1), Lawson JD, Brown CJ, Williams RM, Romero P, Oh JS, Oldfield CJ,
Campen AM, Ratliff CM, Hipps KW, Ausio J, Nissen MS, Reeves R, Kang C, Kissinger 
CR, Bailey RW, Griswold MD, Chiu W, Garner EC, Obradovic Z.

Proteins can exist in a trinity of structures: the ordered state, the molten
globule, and the random coil. The five following examples suggest that native
protein structure can correspond to any of the three states (not just the ordered
state) and that protein function can arise from any of the three states and their
transitions. (1) In a process that likely mimics infection, fd phage converts
from the ordered into the disordered molten globular state. (2) Nucleosome
hyperacetylation is crucial to DNA replication and transcription; this chemical
modification greatly increases the net negative charge of the nucleosome core
particle. We propose that the increased charge imbalance promotes its conversion 
to a much less rigid form. (3) Clusterin contains an ordered domain and also a
native molten globular region. The molten globular domain likely functions as a
proteinaceous detergent for cell remodeling and removal of apoptotic debris. (4) 
In a critical signaling event, a helix in calcineurin becomes bound and
surrounded by calmodulin, thereby turning on calcineurin's serine/threonine
phosphatase activity. Locating the calcineurin helix within a region of disorder 
is essential for enabling calmodulin to surround its target upon binding. (5)
Calsequestrin regulates calcium levels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum by binding
approximately 50 ions/molecule. Disordered polyanion tails at the carboxy
terminus bind many of these calcium ions, perhaps without adopting a unique
structure. In addition to these examples, we will discuss 16 more proteins with
native disorder. These disordered regions include molecular recognition domains, 
protein folding inhibitors, flexible linkers, entropic springs, entropic clocks, 
and entropic bristles. Motivated by such examples of intrinsic disorder, we are
studying the relationships between amino acid sequence and order/disorder, and
from this information we are predicting intrinsic order/disorder from amino acid 
sequence. The sequence-structure relationships indicate that disorder is an
encoded property, and the predictions strongly suggest that proteins in nature
are much richer in intrinsic disorder than are those in the Protein Data Bank.
Recent predictions on 29 genomes indicate that proteins from eucaryotes
apparently have more intrinsic disorder than those from either bacteria or
archaea, with typically > 30% of eucaryotic proteins having disordered regions of
length > or = 50 consecutive residues.


PMID: 11381529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Chemistry. 2001 Mar 2;7(5):1129-32.

Chemical synthesis of lymphotactin: a glycosylated chemokine with a C-terminal
mucin-like domain.

Marcaurelle LA(1), Mizoue LS, Wilken J, Oldham L, Kent SB, Handel TM, Bertozzi
CR.

The synthesis of a 93-residue chemokine, lymphotactin, containing eight sites of 
O-linked glycosylation, was achieved using the technique of native chemical
ligation. A single GalNAc residue was incorporated at each glycosylation site
using standard Fmoc-chemistry to achieve the first total synthesis of a
mucin-type glycoprotein. Using this approach quantities of homogeneous material
were obtained for structural and functional analysis.


PMID: 11303872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Biochemistry. 2001 Mar 6;40(9):2777-89.

Linked folding and anion binding of the Bacillus subtilis ribonuclease P protein.

Henkels CH(1), Kurz JC, Fierke CA, Oas TG.

Ribonuclease P (RNase P) is the endoribonuclease responsible for the
5'-maturation of precursor tRNA transcripts. In bacteria, RNase P is composed of 
a catalytic RNA subunit and an associated protein subunit that enhances the
substrate specificity of the holoenzyme. We have initiated a study of the
biophysical properties of the protein subunit from Bacillus subtilis RNase P (P
protein) toward the goal of understanding the thermodynamics of RNase P
holoenzyme assembly. The P protein is predominantly unfolded in 10 mM sodium
cacodylate at neutral pH based on circular dichroism and NMR studies and
therefore has several characteristics typical of "intrinsically unstructured"
proteins. Furthermore, the P protein folds to its native alpha/beta structure
upon addition of various small molecule anions. Anion-induced folding is best
attributed to the binding of these anions to the folded state of the protein, and
a model is presented which describes the observed tightly coupled folding and
binding phenomena. The P protein also undergoes a cooperative folding transition 
upon addition of the osmolyte trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO). The equilibrium
constant of folding (K(fold)) at 37 degrees C for the P protein was determined to
be 0.0071 +/- 0.0005 using a two-state folding model to describe the TMAO
titration data. Thus, the folding and binding equilibria observed in the
anion-induced folding of the P protein can be uncoupled to determine the
intrinsic binding affinities (K(a)'s) of the anionic ligands. Evidence that the
osmolyte-induced and the ligand-induced folded conformations of the P protein are
structurally similar is also presented.


PMID: 11258888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Protein Sci. 2000 Dec;9(12):2528-34.

Rationale for Bcl-xL/Bad peptide complex formation from structure, mutagenesis,
and biophysical studies.

Petros AM(1), Nettesheim DG, Wang Y, Olejniczak ET, Meadows RP, Mack J, Swift K, 
Matayoshi ED, Zhang H, Thompson CB, Fesik SW.

The three-dimensional structure of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL complexed to
a 25-residue peptide from the death promoting region of Bad was determined using 
NMR spectroscopy. Although the overall structure is similar to Bcl-xL bound to a 
16-residue peptide from the Bak protein (Sattler et al., 1997), the Bad peptide
forms additional interactions with Bcl-xL. However, based upon site-directed
mutagenesis experiments, these additional contacts do not account for the
increased affinity of the Bad 25-mer for Bcl-xL compared to the Bad 16-mer.
Rather, the increased helix propensity of the Bad 25-mer is primarily responsible
for its greater affinity for Bcl-xL. Based on this observation, a pair of
16-residue peptides were designed and synthesized that were predicted to have a
high helix propensity while maintaining the interactions important for
complexation with Bcl-xL. Both peptides showed an increase in helix propensity
compared to the wild-type and exhibited an enhanced affinity for Bcl-xL.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.9.12.2528 
PMCID: PMC2144516
PMID: 11206074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Mol Biol. 2001 Feb 9;306(1):97-108.

Structural basis of diverse sequence-dependent target recognition by the 8 kDa
dynein light chain.

Fan J(1), Zhang Q, Tochio H, Li M, Zhang M.

Dyneins are multi-subunit molecular motors that translocate molecular cargoes
along microtubules. Other than acting as an essential component of the dynein
motor complex, the 89-residue subunit of dynein light chain (DLC8) also regulates
a number of other biological events by binding to various proteins and enzymes.
Currently known DLC8 targets include neuronal nitric oxide synthase; the
proapoptotic Bcl-2 family member protein designated Bim; a Drosophila RNA
localization protein Swallow, myosin V, neuronal scaffolding protein GKAP, and
IkappaBalpha, an inhibitor of the NFkappaB transcription factor. The DLC8-binding
domains of the various targets are confined within a short, continuous stretch of
amino acid residues. However, these domains do not share any obvious sequence
homology with each other. Here, the three-dimensional structures of DLC8
complexed with two peptides corresponding to the DLC8-binding domains of neuronal
nitric oxide synthase and Bim, respectively, were determined by NMR spectroscopy.
Although the two DLC8-binding peptides have entirely different amino acid
sequences, both peptides bind to the protein with a remarkable similar
conformation by engaging the symmetric DLC8 dimer through antiparallel beta-sheet
augmentation via the beta2 strand of the protein. Structural comparison indicates
that the two target peptides use different regions within the conformational
flexible peptide-binding channels to achieve binding specificity. We have also
re-determined the apo-form solution structure of DLC8 in this work. The
structures of the DLC8/target peptide complexes, together with the dynamic
properties of the protein, provide a molecular basis of DLC8's diverse amino acid
sequence-dependent target recognition.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4374 
PMID: 11178896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biopolymers. 2000;55(4):334-46.

Structure and regulation of opioid receptors.

Chaturvedi K(1), Christoffers KH, Singh K, Howells RD.

Significant advances have been made in understanding the structure, function, and
regulation of opioid receptors and endogenous opioid peptides since their
discovery approximately 25 years ago. This review summarizes recent studies aimed
at identifying key amino acids that confer ligand selectivity to the opioid
receptors and that are critical constituents of the ligand binding sites. A
molecular model of the delta receptor based on the crystal structure of rhodopsin
is presented. Agonist-induced down regulation of opioid receptors is discussed,
highlighting recent evidence for the involvement of the ubiquitin/proteasome
system in this process.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0282(2000)55:4<334::AID-BIP1006>3.0.CO;2-S 
PMID: 11169924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Physiol Rev. 2001 Jan;81(1):153-208.

Small GTP-binding proteins.

Takai Y(1), Sasaki T, Matozaki T.

Small GTP-binding proteins (G proteins) exist in eukaryotes from yeast to human
and constitute a superfamily consisting of more than 100 members. This
superfamily is structurally classified into at least five families: the Ras, Rho,
Rab, Sar1/Arf, and Ran families. They regulate a wide variety of cell functions
as biological timers (biotimers) that initiate and terminate specific cell
functions and determine the periods of time for the continuation of the specific 
cell functions. They furthermore play key roles in not only temporal but also
spatial determination of specific cell functions. The Ras family regulates gene
expression, the Rho family regulates cytoskeletal reorganization and gene
expression, the Rab and Sar1/Arf families regulate vesicle trafficking, and the
Ran family regulates nucleocytoplasmic transport and microtubule organization.
Many upstream regulators and downstream effectors of small G proteins have been
isolated, and their modes of activation and action have gradually been
elucidated. Cascades and cross-talks of small G proteins have also been
clarified. In this review, functions of small G proteins and their modes of
activation and action are described.

DOI: 10.1152/physrev.2001.81.1.153 
PMID: 11152757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Proteins. 2001 Jan 1;42(1):38-48.

Sequence complexity of disordered protein.

Romero P(1), Obradovic Z, Li X, Garner EC, Brown CJ, Dunker AK.

Intrinsic disorder refers to segments or to whole proteins that fail to self-fold
into fixed 3D structure, with such disorder sometimes existing in the native
state. Here we report data on the relationships among intrinsic disorder,
sequence complexity as measured by Shannon's entropy, and amino acid composition.
Intrinsic disorder identified in protein crystal structures, and by nuclear
magnetic resonance, circular dichroism, and prediction from amino acid sequence, 
all exhibit similar complexity distributions that are shifted to lower values
compared to, but significantly overlapping with, the distribution for ordered
proteins. Compared to sequences from ordered proteins, these variously
characterized intrinsically disordered segments and proteins, and also a
collection of low-complexity sequences, typically have obviously higher levels of
protein-specific subsets of the following amino acids: R, K, E, P, and S, and
lower levels of subsets of the following: C, W, Y, I, and V. The Swiss Protein
database of sequences exhibits significantly higher amounts of both
low-complexity and predicted-to-be-disordered segments as compared to a
non-redundant set of sequences from the Protein Data Bank, providing additional
data that nature is richer in disordered and low-complexity segments compared to 
the commonness of these features in the set of structurally characterized
proteins.


PMID: 11093259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biopolymers. 2001 Feb;58(2):138-51.

Solution structure of native proteins with irregular folds from Raman optical
activity.

Smyth E(1), Syme CD, Blanch EW, Hecht L, Vasák M, Barron LD.

Raman optical activity (ROA) spectra have been measured for the proteins hen
phosvitin, yeast invertase, bovine alpha-casein, soybean Bowman-Birk protease
inhibitor, and rabbit Cd(7)-metallothionein, all of which have irregular folds in
the native state. The results show that ROA is able to distinguish between two
types of disorder. Specifically, invertase, alpha-casein, the Bowman-Birk
inhibitor, and metallothionein appear to possess a "static" type of disorder
similar to that in disordered states of poly(L-lysine) and poly(L-glutamic acid);
whereas phosvitin appears to possess a more "dynamic" type of disorder similar to
that in reduced (unfolded) lysozyme and ribonuclease A and also in molten globule
protein states. In the delimiting cases, static disorder corresponds to that
found in loops and turns within native proteins with well-defined tertiary folds 
that contain sequences of residues with fixed but nonrepetitive phi,psi angles;
and dynamic disorder corresponds to that envisaged for the model random coil in
which there is a distribution of Ramachandran phi,psi angles for each amino acid 
residue, giving rise to an ensemble of interconverting conformers. In both cases 
there is a propensity for the phi,psi angles to correspond to the alpha, beta and
poly(L-proline) II (PPII) regions of the Ramachandran surface, as in native
proteins with well-defined tertiary folds. Our results suggest that, with the
exception of invertase and metallothionein, an important conformational element
present in the polypeptide and protein states supporting the static type of
disorder is that of the PPII helix. Long sequences of relatively unconstrained
PPII helix, as in alpha-casein, may impart a plastic (rheomorphic) character to
the structure.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0282(200102)58:2<138::AID-BIP30>3.0.CO;2-W 
PMID: 11093113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Genome Inform Ser Workshop Genome Inform. 1998;9:193-200.

The Sequence Attribute Method for Determining Relationships Between Sequence and 
Protein Disorder.

Xie Q, Arnold GE, Romero P, Obradovic Z, Garner E, Dunker AK.

The conditional probability, P(s|x), is a statement of the probability that the
event, s, will occur given prior knowledge for the value of x. If x is given and 
if s is randomly distributed, then an empirical approximation of the true
conditional probability can be computed by the application of Bayes' Theorem.
Here s represents one of two structural classes, either ordered, s (o), or
disordered, s (d), and x represents an attribute value calculated over a window
of 21 amino acids. Plots of P(s|x) versus x provide information about the
correlation between the given sequence attribute and disorder or order. These
conditional probability plots allow quantitative comparisons between individual
attributes for their ability to discriminate between order and disorder states.
Using such quantitative comparisons, 38 different sequence attributes have been
rank-ordered. Attributes based on cysteine, the aromatics, flexible tendencies,
and charge were found to be the best attributes for distinguishing order and
disorder among those tested so far.


PMID: 11072335 


138. Genome Inform Ser Workshop Genome Inform. 1997;8:110-124.

Sequence Data Analysis for Long Disordered Regions Prediction in the Calcineurin 
Family.

Romero, Obradovic, Dunker K.

Our recently reported results (PSB 3:471-482, 1998; Proc. IEEE Intnl. Conf.
Neural Networks 1:90-95, 1997; PSB 3:435-446, 1998) provide strong support for a 
hypothesis that some amino acid sequences code for disordered regions rather than
structured ones and that such disordered regions are commonly involved in
function. General and family-specific neural network predictors developed in
those previous studies suggest that different classes of disordered regions
exist. Here, family-specific data preprocessing for disorder prediction in the
calcineurin (CaN) family is explored. The results show that prediction of order
and disorder on CaN sequence data benefits significantly from the use of
family-specific preprocessing, with feature extraction through principal
components analysis (PCA) outperforming feature selection techniques, although
all methods do a good job of discriminating CaN-specific disordered regions from 
CaN-specific ordered regions. On the other hand, for the discrimination of
CaN-specific disordered regions from general (unrelated to CaN) ordered regions, 
feature selection approaches proved to be more appropriate than PCA. The results 
further support a hypothesis that different kinds of disordered regions exist, as
all family-specific disorder predictors developed in this study significantly
outperformed a previously reported general multi-family disorder predictor.


PMID: 11072311 


139. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2000;16:191-220.

Bone development.

Olsen BR(1), Reginato AM, Wang W.

Early development of the vertebrate skeleton depends on genes that pattern the
distribution and proliferation of cells from cranial neural crest, sclerotomes,
and lateral plate mesoderm into mesenchymal condensations at sites of future
skeletal elements. Within these condensations, cells differentiate to
chondrocytes or osteoblasts and form cartilages and bones under the control of
various transcription factors. In most of the skeleton, organogenesis results in 
cartilage models of future bones; in these models cartilage is replaced by bone
by the process of endochondral ossification. Lastly, through a controlled process
of bone growth and remodeling the final skeleton is shaped and molded.
Significant and exciting insights into all aspects of vertebrate skeletal
development have been obtained through molecular and genetic studies of animal
models and humans with inherited disorders of skeletal morphogenesis,
organogenesis, and growth.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.16.1.191 
PMID: 11031235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Proteins. 2000 Nov 15;41(3):415-27.

Why are "natively unfolded" proteins unstructured under physiologic conditions?

Uversky VN(1), Gillespie JR, Fink AL.

"Natively unfolded" proteins occupy a unique niche within the protein kingdom in 
that they lack ordered structure under conditions of neutral pH in vitro.
Analysis of amino acid sequences, based on the normalized net charge and mean
hydrophobicity, has been applied to two sets of proteins: small globular folded
proteins and "natively unfolded" ones. The results show that "natively unfolded" 
proteins are specifically localized within a unique region of
charge-hydrophobicity phase space and indicate that a combination of low overall 
hydrophobicity and large net charge represent a unique structural feature of
"natively unfolded" proteins.


PMID: 11025552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Oct;7(10):834-7.

Induced fit in RNA-protein recognition.

Williamson JR(1).

Two generalizations can be drawn from the recent rapid progress in understanding 
RNA-protein interactions. First, there is a great diversity of observed protein
and RNA structural motifs. Second, formation of almost every RNA-protein complex 
that has been characterized involves conformational changes in the protein, the
RNA, or both. The role of these conformational changes in the biological function
of RNA-protein complexes is not at all clear. Whether or not conformational
changes are a critical feature of ribonucleoprotein complex assembly or are an
unimportant mechanistic detail, the ubiquity of these changes warrants careful
consideration of their implications.

DOI: 10.1038/79575 
PMID: 11017187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Physiol Rev. 2000 Oct;80(4):1483-521.

Calcineurin: form and function.

Rusnak F(1), Mertz P.

Calcineurin is a eukaryotic Ca(2+)- and calmodulin-dependent serine/threonine
protein phosphatase. It is a heterodimeric protein consisting of a catalytic
subunit calcineurin A, which contains an active site dinuclear metal center, and 
a tightly associated, myristoylated, Ca(2+)-binding subunit, calcineurin B. The
primary sequence of both subunits and heterodimeric quaternary structure is
highly conserved from yeast to mammals. As a serine/threonine protein
phosphatase, calcineurin participates in a number of cellular processes and
Ca(2+)-dependent signal transduction pathways. Calcineurin is potently inhibited 
by immunosuppressant drugs, cyclosporin A and FK506, in the presence of their
respective cytoplasmic immunophilin proteins, cyclophilin and FK506-binding
protein. Many studies have used these immunosuppressant drugs and/or modern
genetic techniques to disrupt calcineurin in model organisms such as yeast,
filamentous fungi, plants, vertebrates, and mammals to explore its biological
function. Recent advances regarding calcineurin structure include the
determination of its three-dimensional structure. In addition, biochemical and
spectroscopic studies are beginning to unravel aspects of the mechanism of
phosphate ester hydrolysis including the importance of the dinuclear metal ion
cofactor and metal ion redox chemistry, studies which may lead to new calcineurin
inhibitors. This review provides a comprehensive examination of the biological
roles of calcineurin and reviews aspects related to its structure and catalytic
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1152/physrev.2000.80.4.1483 
PMID: 11015619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jul 14;1480(1-2):41-56.

Structure and function of alpha-fetoprotein: a biophysical overview.

Gillespie JR(1), Uversky VN.

alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP) is a large serum glycoprotein belonging to the intriguing
class of onco-developmental proteins. AFP has attracted considerable attention
since it was shown that the change in its serum level during pregnancy is a
hallmark of the development of numerous embryonic disorders, while the increase
in its content in the plasma of adults correlates with the appearance of several 
pathological conditions. Over the past 30 years, some 11000 papers have been
published concerning AFP, an average rate of over a publication a day since 1969.
The majority of publications are about the application of the protein in
diagnostics, or about other uses of AFP in biomedicine; though some of them
describe the biochemical and functional properties of AFP, two aspects have been 
extensively reviewed. However, surprisingly little is currently known about
structural properties of this protein as well as about the molecular mechanism of
its function. The present review pursues the aim to describe the current state of
the art in studies of structural properties and conformational stability of AFP. 
An attempt to establish the relationship between conformational transformations
in AFP and its function is also made.


PMID: 11004554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Trends Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;10(10):415-9.

Rho family GTPases: more than simple switches.

Symons M(1), Settleman J.

Rho family GTPases control a large variety of biological processes. Cycling of
Rho proteins between the GDP-bound and the GTP-bound state is controlled by
several classes of regulatory proteins. In this review, we discuss the
signal-transduction mechanisms that control these regulators. We will emphasize
the subcellular localization of Rho GTPases and their regulatory proteins and the
role of GTP hydrolysis in signal transmission.


PMID: 10998597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Aug 18;275(1):209-16.

Alternative splicing of the WNT-2B/WNT-13 gene.

Katoh M(1), Kirikoshi H, Saitoh T, Sagara N, Koike J.

Secreted glycoprotein WNTs play important roles in carcinogenesis and
development. We have previously reported molecular cloning of WNT-2B/WNT-13.
Here, we have isolated a novel WNT-2B isoform (WNT-2B2), in addition to the
original WNT-2B isoform (WNT-2B1). WNT-2B1 and WNT-2B2 are completely different
in the 5'-UTR and in the N-terminal part of the coding region. The N-terminal
hydrophobic domain is contained in WNT-2B1, but not in WNT-2B2. WNT-2B1 and
WNT-2B2 share the WNT-core domain, and show 87.0% amino-acid identity. We have
determined the structure of the WNT-2B gene. The WNT-2B1 mRNA consists of exons
1, 2, and 4-7, while the WNT-2B2 mRNA consists of exons 3-7. WNT-2B2 was
expressed in fetal brain, fetal lung, fetal kidney, caudate nucleus, testis,
glioblastoma cell lines A172, SW1783, gastric cancer cell lines MKN28, MKN74, and
cervical cancer cell line HeLa S3. WNT-2B1 expression level was relatively higher
in fetal brain and fetal lung than in other tissues or cell lines expressing
WNT-2B2. These results indicate that the WNT-2B1 and WNT-2B2 mRNAs are
transcribed due to alternative splicing with distinct expression profile. This is
the first report on the WNT isoforms derived from the same gene due to
alternative splicing.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.3252 
PMID: 10944466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Science. 2000 Aug 11;289(5481):920-30.

The structural basis of ribosome activity in peptide bond synthesis.

Nissen P(1), Hansen J, Ban N, Moore PB, Steitz TA.

Comment in
    Science. 2000 Aug 11;289(5481):878-9.

Using the atomic structures of the large ribosomal subunit from Haloarcula
marismortui and its complexes with two substrate analogs, we establish that the
ribosome is a ribozyme and address the catalytic properties of its all-RNA active
site. Both substrate analogs are contacted exclusively by conserved ribosomal RNA
(rRNA) residues from domain V of 23S rRNA; there are no protein side-chain atoms 
closer than about 18 angstroms to the peptide bond being synthesized. The
mechanism of peptide bond synthesis appears to resemble the reverse of the
acylation step in serine proteases, with the base of A2486 (A2451 in Escherichia 
coli) playing the same general base role as histidine-57 in chymotrypsin. The
unusual pK(a) (where K(a) is the acid dissociation constant) required for A2486
to perform this function may derive in part from its hydrogen bonding to G2482
(G2447 in E. coli), which also interacts with a buried phosphate that could
stabilize unusual tautomers of these two bases. The polypeptide exit tunnel is
largely formed by RNA but has significant contributions from proteins L4, L22,
and L39e, and its exit is encircled by proteins L19, L22, L23, L24, L29, and
L31e.


PMID: 10937990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell. 2000 Jun 9;101(6):671-84.

Drosophila Dscam is an axon guidance receptor exhibiting extraordinary molecular 
diversity.

Schmucker D(1), Clemens JC, Shu H, Worby CA, Xiao J, Muda M, Dixon JE, Zipursky
SL.

A Drosophila homolog of human Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule (DSCAM), an
immunoglobulin superfamily member, was isolated by its affinity to Dock, an
SH3/SH2 adaptor protein required for axon guidance. Dscam binds directly to both 
Dock's SH2 and SH3 domains. Genetic studies revealed that Dscam, Dock and Pak, a 
serine/threonine kinase, act together to direct pathfinding of Bolwig's nerve,
containing a subclass of sensory axons, to an intermediate target in the embryo. 
Dscam also is required for the formation of axon pathways in the embryonic
central nervous system. cDNA and genomic analyses reveal the existence of
multiple forms of Dscam with a conserved architecture containing variable Ig and 
transmembrane domains. Alternative splicing can potentially generate more than
38,000 Dscam isoforms. This molecular diversity may contribute to the specificity
of neuronal connectivity.


PMID: 10892653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 22;275(38):29426-32.

Local structural elements in the mostly unstructured transcriptional activation
domain of human p53.

Lee H(1), Mok KH, Muhandiram R, Park KH, Suk JE, Kim DH, Chang J, Sung YC, Choi
KY, Han KH.

DNA transcription is initiated by a small regulatory region of transactivators
known as the transactivation domain. In contrast to the rapid progress made on
the functional aspect of this promiscuous domain, its structural feature is still
poorly characterized. Here, our multidimensional NMR study reveals that an
unbound full-length p53 transactivation domain, although similar to the recently 
discovered group of loosely folded proteins in that it does not have tertiary
structure, is nevertheless populated by an amphipathic helix and two nascent
turns. The helix is formed by residues Thr(18)-Leu(26)
(Thr-Phe-Ser-Asp-Leu-Trp-Lys-Leu-Leu), whereas the two turns are formed by
residues Met(40)-Met(44) and Asp(48)-Trp(53), respectively. It is remarkable that
these local secondary structures are selectively formed by functionally critical 
and positionally conserved hydrophobic residues present in several acidic
transactivation domains. This observation suggests that such local structures are
general features of acidic transactivation domains and may represent "specificity
determinants" (Ptashne, M., and Gann, A. A. F. (1997), Nature 386, 569-577) that 
are important for transcriptional activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M003107200 
PMID: 10884388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Genes Dev. 2000 Apr 15;14(8):981-93.

Analysis of p53-regulated gene expression patterns using oligonucleotide arrays.

Zhao R(1), Gish K, Murphy M, Yin Y, Notterman D, Hoffman WH, Tom E, Mack DH,
Levine AJ.

Oligonucleotide microarrays were employed to quantitate mRNA levels from a large 
number of genes regulated by the p53 transcription factor. Responses to DNA
damage and to zinc-inducible p53 were compared for their transcription patterns
in cell culture. A cluster analysis of these data demonstrates that genes induced
by gamma radiation, UV radiation, and the zinc-induced p53 form distinct sets and
subsets with a few genes in common to all these treatments. Cell type- or cell
line-specific p53 responses were detected. When p53 proteins were induced with
zinc, the kinetics of induction or repression of mRNAs from p53-responsive genes 
fell into eight distinct classes, five different kinetics of induction, and three
different kinetics of repression. In addition, low levels of p53 in a cell
induced or repressed only a subset of genes observed at higher p53 levels. The
results of this study demonstrate that the nature of the p53 response in diverse 
mRNA species depends on the levels of p53 protein in a cell, the type of inducing
agent or event, and the cell type employed. Of 6000 genes examined for p53
regulatory responses, 107 induced and 54 repressed genes fell into categories of 
apoptosis and growth arrest, cytoskeletal functions, growth factors and their
inhibitors, extracellular matrix, and adhesion genes.


PMCID: PMC316542
PMID: 10783169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Cell. 2000 Mar 3;100(5):551-60.

Structural basis of presequence recognition by the mitochondrial protein import
receptor Tom20.

Abe Y(1), Shodai T, Muto T, Mihara K, Torii H, Nishikawa S, Endo T, Kohda D.

Most mitochondrial proteins are synthesized in the cytosol as precursor proteins 
with a cleavable N-terminal presequence and are imported into mitochondria. We
report here the NMR structure of a general import receptor, rat Tom20, in a
complex with a presequence peptide derived from rat aldehyde dehydrogenase. The
cytosolic domain of Tom20 forms an all alpha-helical structure with a groove to
accommodate the presequence peptide. The bound presequence forms an amphiphilic
helical structure with hydrophobic leucines aligned on one side to interact with 
a hydrophobic patch in the Tom20 groove. Although the positive charges of the
presequence are essential for import ability, presequence binding to Tom20 is
mediated mainly by hydrophobic rather than ionic interactions.


PMID: 10721992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biochemistry. 2000 Mar 14;39(10):2708-13.

Intrinsic structural disorder of the C-terminal activation domain from the bZIP
transcription factor Fos.

Campbell KM(1), Terrell AR, Laybourn PJ, Lumb KJ.

The bZIP proto-oncoprotein c-Fos activates transcription of a wide variety of
genes involved in cell growth. The C-terminal activation domain of c-Fos is
functionally independent of the remainder of the protein. Fos-AD corresponds to
the C-terminal activation domain of human c-Fos (residues 216-380). Fos-AD
suppresses (squelches) transcription in vitro, as expected for a functional
activation domain lacking a DNA-binding domain. Fos-AD is unstructured and highly
mobile, as demonstrated by circular dichroism spectra indicative of unfolded
proteins, a lack of (1)H chemical shift dispersion, and negative (1)H-(15)N
heteronuclear nuclear Overhauser effects. The hydrodynamic properties of Fos-AD
are also consistent with an extended structure. We conclude that the C-terminal
domain of human c-Fos is biologically active yet intrinsically disordered. Our
results suggest that conformational disorder is an integral aspect of the diverse
contributions to transcriptional regulation by c-Fos.


PMID: 10704222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2000 Jan;24(1):85-106.

Class IIa bacteriocins: biosynthesis, structure and activity.

Ennahar S(1), Sashihara T, Sonomoto K, Ishizaki A.

In the last decade, a variety of ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial peptides
or bacteriocins produced by lactic acid bacteria have been identified and
characterized. As a result of these studies, insight has been gained into
fundamental aspects of biology and biochemistry such as producer self protection,
membrane-protein interactions, and protein modification and secretion. Moreover, 
it has become evident that these peptides may be developed into useful
antimicrobial additives. Class IIa bacteriocins can be considered as the major
subgroup of bacteriocins from lactic acid bacteria, not only because of their
large number, but also because of their activities and potential applications.
They have first attracted particular attention as listericidal compounds and are 
now believed to be the next in line if more bacteriocins are to be approved in
the future. The present review attempts to provide an insight into general
knowledge available for class IIa bacteriocins and discusses common features and 
recent findings concerning these substances.


PMID: 10640600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jan 1;28(1):235-42.

The Protein Data Bank.

Berman HM(1), Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H, Shindyalov
IN, Bourne PE.

The Protein Data Bank (PDB; http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/ ) is the single worldwide
archive of structural data of biological macromolecules. This paper describes the
goals of the PDB, the systems in place for data deposition and access, how to
obtain further information, and near-term plans for the future development of the
resource.


PMCID: PMC102472
PMID: 10592235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Mol Biol. 1999 Oct 22;293(2):321-31.

Intrinsically unstructured proteins: re-assessing the protein structure-function 
paradigm.

Wright PE(1), Dyson HJ.

A major challenge in the post-genome era will be determination of the functions
of the encoded protein sequences. Since it is generally assumed that the function
of a protein is closely linked to its three-dimensional structure, prediction or 
experimental determination of the library of protein structures is a matter of
high priority. However, a large proportion of gene sequences appear to code not
for folded, globular proteins, but for long stretches of amino acids that are
likely to be either unfolded in solution or adopt non-globular structures of
unknown conformation. Characterization of the conformational propensities and
function of the non-globular protein sequences represents a major challenge. The 
high proportion of these sequences in the genomes of all organisms studied to
date argues for important, as yet unknown functions, since there could be no
other reason for their persistence throughout evolution. Clearly the assumption
that a folded three-dimensional structure is necessary for function needs to be
re-examined. Although the functions of many proteins are directly related to
their three-dimensional structures, numerous proteins that lack intrinsic
globular structure under physiological conditions have now been recognized. Such 
proteins are frequently involved in some of the most important regulatory
functions in the cell, and the lack of intrinsic structure in many cases is
relieved when the protein binds to its target molecule. The intrinsic lack of
structure can confer functional advantages on a protein, including the ability to
bind to several different targets. It also allows precise control over the
thermodynamics of the binding process and provides a simple mechanism for
inducibility by phosphorylation or through interaction with other components of
the cellular machinery. Numerous examples of domains that are unstructured in
solution but which become structured upon binding to the target have been noted
in the areas of cell cycle control and both transcriptional and translational
regulation, and unstructured domains are present in proteins that are targeted
for rapid destruction. Since such proteins participate in critical cellular
control mechanisms, it appears likely that their rapid turnover, aided by their
unstructured nature in the unbound state, provides a level of control that allows
rapid and accurate responses of the cell to changing environmental conditions.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.3110 
PMID: 10550212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. RNA. 1999 Aug;5(8):1042-54.

Yeast ortholog of the Drosophila crooked neck protein promotes spliceosome
assembly through stable U4/U6.U5 snRNP addition.

Chung S(1), McLean MR, Rymond BC.

Mutants in the Drosophila crooked neck (crn) gene show an embryonic lethal
phenotype with severe developmental defects. The unusual crn protein consists of 
sixteen tandem repeats of the 34 amino acid tetratricopeptide (TPR) protein
recognition domain. Crn-like TPR elements are found in several RNA processing
proteins, although it is unknown how the TPR repeats or the crn protein
contribute to Drosophila development. We have isolated a Saccharomyces cerevisiae
gene, CLF1, that encodes a crooked neck-like factor. CLF1 is an essential gene
but the lethal phenotype of a clf1::HIS3 chromosomal null mutant can be rescued
by plasmid-based expression of CLF1 or the Drosophila crn open reading frame.
Clf1p is required in vivo and in vitro for pre-mRNA 5' splice site cleavage.
Extracts depleted of Clf1p arrest spliceosome assembly after U2 snRNP addition
but prior to productive U4/U6.U5 association. Yeast two-hybrid analyses and in
vitro binding studies show that Clf1p interacts specifically and differentially
with the U1 snRNP-Prp40p protein and the yeast U2AF65 homolog, Mud2p.
Intriguingly, Prp40p and Mud2p also bind the phylogenetically conserved
branchpoint binding protein (BBP/SF1). Our results indicate that Clf1p acts as a 
scaffolding protein in spliceosome assembly and suggest that Clf1p may support
the cross-intron bridge during the prespliceosome-to-spliceosome transition.


PMCID: PMC1369828
PMID: 10445879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Bioinformatics. 1999 Mar;15(3):258-9.

Removing redundancy in SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL.

O'Donovan C(1), Martin MJ, Glemet E, Codani JJ, Apweiler R.

SUMMARY: One of the distinguishing criteria of the SWISS-PROT protein sequence
data bank is minimal redundancy. The introduction of TrEMBL as a supplementary
database ensured the comprehensiveness of SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL but introduced
some degree of redundancy. We developed a strategy to identify the redundancy
present within and between SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL and its subsequent removal.
AVAILABILITY: The tools mentioned in this paper are available on request.


PMID: 10222414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Mol Biol. 1999 Apr 16;287(5):821-8.

Mechanisms of cyclin-dependent kinase regulation: structures of Cdks, their
cyclin activators, and Cip and INK4 inhibitors.

Pavletich NP(1).

The cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) have a central role in coordinating the
eukaryotic cell division cycle, and also serve to integrate diverse
growth-regulatory signals. Cdks are controlled through several different
processes involving the binding of activating cyclin subunits, of inhibitory Cip 
or INK4 subunits, and phosphorylation. Crystallographic studies of Cdks in four
different complexes, reviewed here, have revealed the mechanisms by which these
regulatory processes control the Cdk switches. All of these mechanisms involve
conformational changes in and around the catalytic cleft of the kinase,
indicating that Cdks have evolved an intrinsic conformational flexibility. This
flexibility is central to their ability to switch states in response to a diverse
range of growth-regulatory signals.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2640 
PMID: 10222191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Apr 27;96(9):4892-7.

Absence of interdomain contacts in the crystal structure of the RNA recognition
motifs of Sex-lethal.

Crowder SM(1), Kanaar R, Rio DC, Alber T.

By binding specific RNA transcripts, the Sex-lethal protein (SXL) governs sexual 
differentiation and dosage compensation in Drosophila melanogaster. To
investigate the basis for RNA binding specificity, we determined the crystal
structure of the tandem RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) of SXL. Both RRMs adopt the
canonical RRM fold, and the 10-residue, interdomain linker shows significant
disorder. In contrast to the previously determined structure of the two-RRM
fragment of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein Al, SXL displays no
interdomain contacts between RRMs. These results suggest that the SXL RRMs are
flexibly tethered in solution, and RNA binding restricts the orientation of RRMs.
Therefore, the observed specificity for single-stranded, U-rich sequences does
not arise from a predefined, rigid architecture of the isolated SXL RRMs.


PMCID: PMC21787
PMID: 10220389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Cell Biol. 1998 Sep 21;142(6):1595-604.

The symmetrical structure of structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) and MukB
proteins: long, antiparallel coiled coils, folded at a flexible hinge.

Melby TE(1), Ciampaglio CN, Briscoe G, Erickson HP.

Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) proteins function in chromosome
condensation and several other aspects of DNA processing. They are large proteins
characterized by an NH2-terminal nucleotide triphosphate (NTP)-binding domain,
two long segments of coiled coil separated by a hinge, and a COOH-terminal
domain. Here, we have visualized by EM the SMC protein from Bacillus subtilis
(BsSMC) and MukB from Escherichia coli, which we argue is a divergent SMC
protein. Both BsSMC and MukB show two thin rods with globular domains at the ends
emerging from the hinge. The hinge appears to be quite flexible: the arms can
open up to 180 degrees, separating the terminal domains by 100 nm, or close to
near 0 degrees, bringing the terminal globular domains together. A surprising
observation is that the approximately 300-amino acid-long coiled coils are in an 
antiparallel arrangement. Known coiled coils are almost all parallel, and the
longest antiparallel coiled coils known previously are 35-45 amino acids long.
This antiparallel arrangement produces a symmetrical molecule with both an NH2-
and a COOH-terminal domain at each end. The SMC molecule therefore has two
complete and identical functional domains at the ends of the long arms. The
bifunctional symmetry and a possible scissoring action at the hinge should
provide unique biomechanical properties to the SMC proteins.


PMCID: PMC2141774
PMID: 9744887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Biol Chem. 1997 Dec;378(12):1501-8.

Assessment by 1H NMR spectroscopy of the structural behaviour of human
parathyroid-hormone-related protein(1-34) and its close relationship with the
N-terminal fragments of human parathyroid hormone in solution.

Gronwald W(1), Schomburg D, Tegge W, Wray V.

Human parathyroid-hormone-related protein (hPTHrP) is a hormone that is
over-expressed by a large number of tumors and is produced by a variety of normal
cells. Its main biological functions are shown by the N-terminal fragment (1-34) 
and are similar to those of parathyroid hormone with which it shares a common
G-protein-coupled receptor. Hence to gain insight into the structure-function
relationship of these hormones we have investigated the solution structure of
hPTHrP(1-34) in pure water alone and have monitored the effect of adding TFE. CD 
spectra in pure water showed that it only possesses a small content of
alpha-helical secondary structure, which from the NMR data, consists of a short
unstable helix between Gln-16 and Leu-24 with the rest of the peptide in an
essentially unstructured state. On adding 50% TFE (v/v) there was a considerable 
increase in stable secondary structure, without any evidence of stable tertiary
structure. The subsequent structure calculations showed the presence of two well 
defined helices, from Ser-3 to Gly-12 and from Asp-17 to Thr-33, connected by a
flexible linker. The similarity in behaviour of hPTHrP(1-34) and the N-terminal
fragments of PTH under various solution conditions is shown from the 1H NMR data 
presented here and an extensive review of the literature data.


PMID: 9461349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 1997;13:261-91.

Cyclin-dependent kinases: engines, clocks, and microprocessors.

Morgan DO(1).

Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) play a well-established role in the regulation of
the eukaryotic cell division cycle and have also been implicated in the control
of gene transcription and other processes. Cdk activity is governed by a complex 
network of regulatory subunits and phosphorylation events whose precise effects
on Cdk conformation have been revealed by recent crystallographic studies. In the
cell, these regulatory mechanisms generate an interlinked series of Cdk
oscillators that trigger the events of cell division.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.13.1.261 
PMID: 9442875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Methods Enzymol. 1997;287:206-15.

Lymphotactin: a new class of chemokine.

Hedrick JA(1), Zlotnik A.


PMID: 9330324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Nature. 1997 Sep 18;389(6648):251-60.

Crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle at 2.8 A resolution.

Luger K(1), Mäder AW, Richmond RK, Sargent DF, Richmond TJ.

Comment in
    Nature. 1997 Sep 18;389(6648):231, 233.

The X-ray crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle of chromatin shows in
atomic detail how the histone protein octamer is assembled and how 146 base pairs
of DNA are organized into a superhelix around it. Both histone/histone and
histone/DNA interactions depend on the histone fold domains and additional, well 
ordered structure elements extending from this motif. Histone amino-terminal
tails pass over and between the gyres of the DNA superhelix to contact
neighbouring particles. The lack of uniformity between multiple
histone/DNA-binding sites causes the DNA to deviate from ideal superhelix
geometry.

DOI: 10.1038/38444 
PMID: 9305837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Mol Biol. 1997 May 9;268(3):666-77.

Solution structure of R-elafin, a specific inhibitor of elastase.

Francart C(1), Dauchez M, Alix AJ, Lippens G.

The solution structure of r-elafin, a specific elastase inhibitor, has been
determined using NMR spectroscopy. Characterized by a flat core and a flexible
N-terminal extremity, the three-dimensional structure is formed by a central
twisted beta-hairpin accompanied by two external segments linked by the
proteinase binding loop. A cluster of three disulfide bridges connects the
external segments to the central beta-sheet and a single fourth disulfide bridge 
links the binding loop to the central beta-turn. The same spatial distribution of
disulfide bridges can be observed in both domains of the secretory leukocyte
protease inhibitor (SLPI), another elastase inhibitor. The structural homology
between r-elafin and the C-terminal domain of SLPI confirms the former as a
second member of the chelonianin family of proteinase inhibitors. Based on the
homology between the two proteins and recent results obtained for elastase
binding mutants of the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI), we define the 
segment 22 to 27 as the binding loop of elafin, with the scissile peptide bond
between Ala24 and Met25. In our solution structures, this loop is extended and
solvent-exposed, and exhibits a large degree of flexibility. This mobility,
already observed for the binding loop in other protease inhibitors in solution,
might be an important feature for the interaction with the corresponding
protease.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.0983 
PMID: 9171290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Science. 1997 Feb 14;275(5302):983-6.

Structure of Bcl-xL-Bak peptide complex: recognition between regulators of
apoptosis.

Sattler M(1), Liang H, Nettesheim D, Meadows RP, Harlan JE, Eberstadt M, Yoon HS,
Shuker SB, Chang BS, Minn AJ, Thompson CB, Fesik SW.

Heterodimerization between members of the Bcl-2 family of proteins is a key event
in the regulation of programmed cell death. The molecular basis for heterodimer
formation was investigated by determination of the solution structure of a
complex between the survival protein Bcl-xL and the death-promoting region of the
Bcl-2-related protein Bak. The structure and binding affinities of mutant Bak
peptides indicate that the Bak peptide adopts an amphipathic alpha helix that
interacts with Bcl-xL through hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions.
Mutations in full-length Bak that disrupt either type of interaction inhibit the 
ability of Bak to heterodimerize with Bcl-xL.


PMID: 9020082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. FEBS Lett. 1997 Jan 27;402(1):73-80.

GAK: a cyclin G associated kinase contains a tensin/auxilin-like domain.

Kanaoka Y(1), Kimura SH, Okazaki I, Ikeda M, Nojima H.

We have cloned a cDNA encoding a novel association partner of cyclin G by
West-Western blotting. The cDNA encodes a protein that harbors a Ser/Thr protein 
kinase-like catalytic domain at the N-terminal. Hence, we named it GAK (cyclin
G-associated kinase). The long C-terminal extension shares homology with tensin
and auxilin, and contains a leucine zipper region. Co-immunoprecipitation and
Western blotting showed that GAK and cyclin G associate together in vivo. GAK
also co-precipitated with CDK5, and CDK5 was found to be associated with cyclin
G. We also showed by BIAcore analysis that the GAK-cyclin G interaction was
direct.


PMID: 9013862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6593-602.

p53-dependent association between cyclin G and the B' subunit of protein
phosphatase 2A.

Okamoto K(1), Kamibayashi C, Serrano M, Prives C, Mumby MC, Beach D.

We and others previously showed that cyclin G is a transcriptional target of the 
p53 tumor suppressor protein. However, cellular proteins which might form a
complex with cyclin G have not yet been identified. To gain insight into the
biological role of cyclin G, we used the yeast two-hybrid screen and isolated two
mouse cDNAs encoding cyclin G-interacting proteins. Interestingly, both positive 
cDNAs encoded B' regulatory subunits of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). One clone 
encodes B'alpha, while the other clone codes for a new member of the B' family,
B'beta. B'beta is 70% identical to other members of the B' family. B'alpha
associated both in vitro and in vivo with cyclin G but not with the other
mammalian cyclins. Furthermore, cyclin G formed a complex with B'alpha only after
induction of p53 in p53 temperature-sensitive cell lines. These results indicate 
that cyclin G forms a specific complex with the B' subunit of PP2A and that
complex formation is regulated by p53. Potential roles for the cyclin G-B'
complex in p53-mediated pathways are discussed.


PMCID: PMC231661
PMID: 8887688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 15;93(21):11504-9.

Structural studies of p21Waf1/Cip1/Sdi1 in the free and Cdk2-bound state:
conformational disorder mediates binding diversity.

Kriwacki RW(1), Hengst L, Tennant L, Reed SI, Wright PE.

The cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitor p21Waf1/Cip1/Sdi1, important for
p53-dependent cell cycle control, mediates G1/S arrest through inhibition of Cdks
and possibly through inhibition of DNA replication. Cdk inhibition requires a
sequence of approximately 60 amino acids within the p21 NH2 terminus. We show,
using proteolytic mapping, circular dichroism spectropolarimetry, and nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, that p21 and NH2-terminal fragments that are
active as Cdk inhibitors lack stable secondary or tertiary structure in the free 
solution state. In sharp contrast to the disordered free state, however, the p21 
NH2 terminus adopts an ordered stable conformation when bound to Cdk2, as shown
directly by NMR spectroscopy. We have, thus, identified a striking disorder-order
transition for p21 upon binding to one of its biological targets, Cdk2. This
structural transition has profound implications in light of the ability of p21 to
bind and inhibit a diverse family of cyclin-Cdk complexes, including cyclin
A-Cdk2, cyclin E-Cdk2, and cyclin D-Cdk4. Our findings suggest that the
flexibility, or disorder, of free p21 is associated with binding diversity and
offer insights into the role for structural disorder in mediating binding
specificity in biological systems. Further, these observations challenge the
generally accepted view of proteins that stable secondary and tertiary structure 
are prerequisites for biological activity and suggest that a broader view of
protein structure should be considered in the context of structure-activity
relationships.


PMCID: PMC38087
PMID: 8876165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Science. 1996 Nov 8;274(5289):948-53.

Structure of the MDM2 oncoprotein bound to the p53 tumor suppressor
transactivation domain.

Kussie PH(1), Gorina S, Marechal V, Elenbaas B, Moreau J, Levine AJ, Pavletich
NP.

Comment on
    Science. 1996 Nov 8;274(5289):921-2.

The MDM2 oncoprotein is a cellular inhibitor of the p53 tumor suppressor in that 
it can bind the transactivation domain of p53 and downregulate its ability to
activate transcription. In certain cancers, MDM2 amplification is a common event 
and contributes to the inactivation of p53. The crystal structure of the
109-residue amino-terminal domain of MDM2 bound to a 15-residue transactivation
domain peptide of p53 revealed that MDM2 has a deep hydrophobic cleft on which
the p53 peptide binds as an amphipathic alpha helix. The interface relies on the 
steric complementarity between the MDM2 cleft and the hydrophobic face of the p53
alpha helix and, in particular, on a triad of p53 amino acids-Phe19, Trp23, and
Leu26-which insert deep into the MDM2 cleft. These same p53 residues are also
involved in transactivation, supporting the hypothesis that MDM2 inactivates p53 
by concealing its transactivation domain. The structure also suggests that the
amphipathic alpha helix may be a common structural motif in the binding of a
diverse family of transactivation factors to the TATA-binding protein-associated 
factors.


PMID: 8875929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Neurosci. 1996 Oct 1;16(19):5961-6.

p53-independent cyclin G expression in a group of mature neurons and its enhanced
expression during nerve regeneration.

Morita N(1), Kiryu S, Kiyama H.

An increase in cyclin G expression after nerve injury was demonstrated by
differential display PCR, carried out to compare references in expression of
mRNAs between axotomized and normal hypoglossal motoneurons in the rat. The nerve
injury dramatically upregulated the expression of cyclin G mRNA in the
motoneurons during the early phase of the nerve regeneration process, suggesting 
an involvement of cyclin G in the early stage of nerve regeneration. In brain, in
situ hybridization studies also demonstrated cyclin G expression in a restricted 
group of matured neurons, particularly in the telencephalon and the thalamus.
This constitutive expression in mature neurons suggests that cyclin G may have a 
function different from other members of the cyclin group. In addition, although 
cyclin G has been shown to be a transcription target of p53, the upregulation of 
cyclin G in injured motoneurons, as well as the expression in the adult rat
brain, was not affected in the p53-deficient mouse. These data suggest that the
expression of cyclin G, at least in the nervous system, is not regulated by p53
predominantly, and that there may be alternative regulatory factors or pathways
for cyclin G expression.


PMID: 8815878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Science. 1996 Mar 1;271(5253):1247-54.

Crystal structure of the lactose operon repressor and its complexes with DNA and 
inducer.

Lewis M(1), Chang G, Horton NC, Kercher MA, Pace HC, Schumacher MA, Brennan RG,
Lu P.

Comment in
    Science. 1996 Mar 1;271(5253):1245-6.
    Science. 1996 Dec 13;274(5294):1930-1; author reply 1931-2.
    Science. 1996 Dec 13;274(5294):1929-30; author reply 1931-2.

The lac operon of Escherichia coli is the paradigm for gene regulation. Its key
component is the lac repressor, a product of the lacI gene. The three-dimensional
structures of the intact lac repressor, the lac repressor bound to the gratuitous
inducer isopropyl-beta-D-1-thiogalactoside (IPTG) and the lac repressor complexed
with a 21-base pair symmetric operator DNA have been determined. These three
structures show the conformation of the molecule in both the induced and
repressed states and provide a framework for understanding a wealth of
biochemical and genetic information. The DNA sequence of the lac operon has three
lac repressor recognition sites in a stretch of 500 base pairs. The
crystallographic structure of the complex with DNA suggests that the tetrameric
repressor functions synergistically with catabolite gene activator protein (CAP) 
and participates in the quaternary formation of repression loops in which one
tetrameric repressor interacts simultaneously with two sites on the genomic DNA.


PMID: 8638105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 19;271(3):1379-84.

Conformational changes in the fibronectin binding MSCRAMMs are induced by ligand 
binding.

House-Pompeo K(1), Xu Y, Joh D, Speziale P, Höök M.

Bacterial adherence to host tissue involves specific microbial surface adhesins
of which a subfamily termed microbial surface components recognizing adhesive
matrix molecules (MSCRAMMs) specifically recognize extracellular matrix
components. We now report on the biophysical characterization of recombinant
fibronectin binding MSCRAMMs originating from several different species of
Gram-positive bacteria. The far-UV CD spectra (190-250 nm) of recombinant forms
of the ligand binding domain of the MSCRAMMs, in a phosphate-buffered saline
solution at neutral pH, were characteristic of a protein containing little or no 
regular secondary structure. The intrinsic viscosity of this domain was found to 
be the same in the presence or absence of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride, indicating
that the native and denatured conformations are indistinguishable. On addition of
fibronectin NH2 terminus as ligand to the recombinant adhesin there is a large
change in the resulting far-UV CD difference spectra. At a 4.9 M excess of the
NH2 terminus the difference spectra shifted to what was predominately a
beta-sheet conformation, as judged by comparison with model far-UV CD spectra.
The fibronectin NH2-terminal domain undergoes a minute but reproducible
blue-shift of its intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence on addition of rFNBD-A, which
contains no tryptophan residues. Since this result indicates that there is no
large change in the environment of the tryptophan residues of the NH2 terminus on
binding, the large shift in secondary structure observed by CD analysis is
attributed to induction of a predominately beta-sheet secondary structure in the 
adhesin on binding to fibronectin NH2 terminus.


PMID: 8576127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Nature. 1995 Dec 7;378(6557):641-4.

Crystal structures of human calcineurin and the human FKBP12-FK506-calcineurin
complex.

Kissinger CR(1), Parge HE, Knighton DR, Lewis CT, Pelletier LA, Tempczyk A,
Kalish VJ, Tucker KD, Showalter RE, Moomaw EW, et al.

Calcineurin (CaN) is a calcium- and calmodulin-dependent protein serine/threonine
phosphate which is critical for several important cellular processes, including
T-cell activation. CaN is the target of the immunosuppressive drugs cyclosporin A
and FK506, which inhibit CaN after forming complexes with cytoplasmic binding
proteins (cyclophilin and FKBP12, respectively). We report here the crystal
structures of full-length human CaN at 2.1 A resolution and of the complex of
human CaN with FKBP12-FK506 at 3.5 A resolution. In the native CaN structure, an 
auto-inhibitory element binds at the Zn/Fe-containing active site. The metal-site
geometry and active-site water structure suggest a catalytic mechanism involving 
nucleophilic attack on the substrate phosphate by a metal-activated water
molecule. In the FKBP12-FK506-CaN complex, the auto-inhibitory element is
displaced from the active site. The site of binding of FKBP12-FK506 appears to be
shared by other non-competitive inhibitors of calcineurin, including a natural
anchoring protein.

DOI: 10.1038/378641a0 
PMID: 8524402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Biochemistry. 1993 Jun 8;32(22):5832-41.

Solution structure of pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide by
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.

Wray V(1), Kakoschke C, Nokihara K, Naruse S.

The solution structures of the recently discovered neuropeptides PACAP38 and
PACAP27 have been investigated in aqueous solution containing varying amounts of 
trifluoroethanol (TFE) by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy and a combination 
of 2D 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, distance geometry, and
refined molecular dynamics and energy minimization calculations. In aqueous
solution both peptides show only small transitory amounts of stable structure
while in 50% TFE they adopt ordered structures. Qualitative NOE data and the use 
of the chemical shift index of the alpha-protons identified the positions of
alpha-helical regions. A set of low-energy conformations compatible with the
quantitative NOE data were obtained for both and each set were subjected to RMS
analysis to determine the positions of the secondary structure elements. PACAP38 
has an initial disordered N-terminal domain of eight amino acids, followed by an 
alpha-helical structure stretching from Ser-9 to Val-26, which contains a
discontinuity between Lys-20 and Lys-21, and in the C-terminal region there is a 
short alpha-helix between Gly-28 and Arg-34. The structure of PACAP27 mirrors
remarkably closely that of PACAP38 and shows no fraying of the C-terminal helix. 
The physiological significance of the three structural domains (1-8, 9-26, and
27-38) of PACAP38 is shown by a comprehensive review of recent in vitro and in
vivo investigations of PACAP analogues. The correspondence of the global
structural features of PACAP with other members of this family of peptides
(namely, secretin, glucagon, GHRF1-29 and VIP) is demonstrated by inspection of
the chemical shift indices of the alpha-protons.


PMID: 8504103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Development. 1993 Apr;117(4):1183-98.

Regulation of development and differentiation by the extracellular matrix.

Adams JC(1), Watt FM.


PMID: 8404525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1993 Oct;3(5):789-801.

Chromosome partition in Escherichia coli.

Hiraga S(1).

The past year has seen important genetic and biochemical advances in our
understanding of the mechanisms that are involved in chromosome partition into
two daughter cells in Escherichia coli. Topoisomerase IV and XerCD recombinase
have been shown to be required for the unlinking of replicated chromosomes. MukB,
an alpha-helical coiled-coil protein, has been shown to be involved in chromosome
partition, and this is the first candidate for a bacterial motor protein. Another
protein, FtsZ, has been shown to form a constriction ring in cell division and
may also relate to chromosome partition.


PMID: 8274864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Trends Genet. 1994 Mar;10(3):94-100.

HMG domain proteins: architectural elements in the assembly of nucleoprotein
structures.

Grosschedl R(1), Giese K, Pagel J.

The high-mobility group (HMG) domain is a DNA-binding motif that is shared
abundant non-histone components of chromatin and by specific regulators of
transcription and cell differentiation. The HMG family of proteins comprises
members with multiple HMG domains that bind DNA with low sequence specificity,
and members with single HMG domains that recognize specific nucleotide sequences.
Common properties of HMG domain proteins include interaction with the minor
groove of the DNA helix, binding to irregular DNA structures, and the capacity to
modulate DNA structure by bending. DNA bending induced by the HMG domain can
facilitate the formation of higher-order nucleoprotein complexes, suggesting that
HMG domain proteins may have an architectural role in assembling such complexes.


PMID: 8178371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Aug 11;22(15):3131-7.

Pax-3-DNA interaction: flexibility in the DNA binding and induction of DNA
conformational changes by paired domains.

Chalepakis G(1), Wijnholds J, Gruss P.

The mouse Pax-3 gene encodes a protein that is a member of the Pax family of DNA 
binding proteins. Pax-3 contains two DNA binding domains: a paired domain (PD)
and a paired type homeodomain (HD). Both domains are separated by 53 amino acids 
and interact synergistically with a sequence harboring an ATTA motif (binding to 
the HD) and a GTTCC site (binding to the PD) separated by 5 base pairs. Here we
show that the interaction of Pax-3 with these two binding sites is independent of
their angular orientation. In addition, the protein spacer region between the HD 
and the PD can be shortened without changing the spatial flexibility of the two
DNA binding domains which interact with DNA. Furthermore, by using circular
permutation analysis we determined that binding of Pax-3 to a DNA fragment
containing a specific binding site causes conformational changes in the DNA, as
indicated by the different mobilities of the Pax-3-DNA complexes. The ability to 
change the conformation of the DNA was found to be an intrinsic property of the
Pax-3 PD and of all Pax proteins that we tested so far. These in vitro studies
suggest that interaction of Pax proteins with their specific sequences in vivo
may result in an altered DNA conformation.


PMCID: PMC310286
PMID: 8065927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Science. 1994 Jul 15;265(5170):346-55.

Crystal structure of a p53 tumor suppressor-DNA complex: understanding
tumorigenic mutations.

Cho Y(1), Gorina S, Jeffrey PD, Pavletich NP.

Comment in
    Science. 1994 Jul 15;265(5170):334-5.

Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor are the most frequently observed genetic
alterations in human cancer. The majority of the mutations occur in the core
domain which contains the sequence-specific DNA binding activity of the p53
protein (residues 102-292), and they result in loss of DNA binding. The crystal
structure of a complex containing the core domain of human p53 and a DNA binding 
site has been determined at 2.2 angstroms resolution and refined to a
crystallographic R factor of 20.5 percent. The core domain structure consists of 
a beta sandwich that serves as a scaffold for two large loops and a
loop-sheet-helix motif. The two loops, which are held together in part by a
tetrahedrally coordinated zinc atom, and the loop-sheet-helix motif form the DNA 
binding surface of p53. Residues from the loop-sheet-helix motif interact in the 
major groove of the DNA, while an arginine from one of the two large loops
interacts in the minor groove. The loops and the loop-sheet-helix motif consist
of the conserved regions of the core domain and contain the majority of the p53
mutations identified in tumors. The structure supports the hypothesis that DNA
binding is critical for the biological activity of p53, and provides a framework 
for understanding how mutations inactivate it.


PMID: 8023157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. EMBO J. 1994 Oct 17;13(20):4816-22.

Cyclin G is a transcriptional target of the p53 tumor suppressor protein.

Okamoto K(1), Beach D.

Through a PCR-based differential screening method, cyclin G was identified as a
novel transcriptional target of the p53 tumor suppressor gene product. In both a 
mouse p53 temperature-sensitive leukemic cell line and mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEF) after gamma-irradiation, cyclin G mRNA was rapidly induced. MEF
from a p53-deficient mouse expressed cyclin G at a level > 10-fold lower than
that from a wild-type mouse. Using a DNA binding assay, a specific p53 binding
site was identified upstream from the cyclin G gene, which functioned as a
p53-dependent cis-acting element in a transient transfection assay. These results
suggest that cyclin G might participate in a p53-mediated pathway to prevent
tumorigenesis.


PMCID: PMC395420
PMID: 7957050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nature. 1995 Mar 9;374(6518):131-4.

Principles of CDK regulation.

Morgan DO(1).

As key regulators of the cell cycle, the cyclin-dependent kinases must be tightly
regulated by extra- and intracellular signals. The activity of cyclin-dependent
kinases is controlled by four highly conserved biochemical mechanisms, forming a 
web of regulatory pathways unmatched in its elegance and intricacy.

DOI: 10.1038/374131a0 
PMID: 7877684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Nat Struct Biol. 1995 Apr;2(4):321-33.

Refined solution structure of the oligomerization domain of the tumour suppressor
p53.

Clore GM(1), Ernst J, Clubb R, Omichinski JG, Kennedy WM, Sakaguchi K, Appella E,
Gronenborn AM.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Biol. 1995 Apr;2(4):253-4.

The NMR solution structure of the oligomerization domain of the tumour suppressor
p53 (residues 319-360) has been refined. The structure comprises a dimer of
dimers, oriented in an approximately orthogonal manner. The present structure
determination is based on 4,472 experimental NMR restraints which represents a
three and half fold increase over our previous work in the number of NOE
restraints at the tetramerization interface. A comparison with the recently
solved 1.7 A resolution X-ray structure shows that the structures are very
similar and that the average angular root-mean-square difference in the
interhelical angles is about 1 degree. The results of recent extensive
mutagenesis data and the possible effects of mutations which have been identified
in human cancers are discussed in the light of the present structure.


PMID: 7796267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Nat Struct Biol. 1994 Dec;1(12):877-90.

Solution structure of the tetrameric minimum transforming domain of p53.

Lee W(1), Harvey TS, Yin Y, Yau P, Litchfield D, Arrowsmith CH.

Erratum in
    Nat Struct Biol 1995 Jan;2(1):81.

We report the solution structure of the minimum transforming domain (residues
303-366) of human p53 (p53tet) determined by multidimensional NMR spectroscopy.
This domain contains a number of important functions associated with p53 activity
including transformation, oligomerization, nuclear localization and a
phosphorylation site for p34/cdc2 kinase. p53tet forms a symmetric dimer of
dimers that is significantly different from a recent structure reported for a
shorter construct of this domain. Phosphorylation of Ser 315 has only minor
structural consequences, as this region of the protein is unstructured. Modelling
based on the p53tet structure suggests possible modes of interaction between
adjacent domains in full-length p53 as well as modes of interaction with DNA.


PMID: 7773777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cancer Res. 1995 Dec 1;55(23):5493-8.

Retroviral vector-mediated gene transfer of antisense cyclin G1 (CYCG1) inhibits 
proliferation of human osteogenic sarcoma cells.

Skotzko M(1), Wu L, Anderson WF, Gordon EM, Hall FL.

Genetic changes found in human osteogenic sarcoma cells, including loss of the
p53 and Rb tumor suppressor elements and overexpression of the cyclin G1 (CYCG1) 
proto-oncogene, suggest the potential of gene transfer as a treatment for
metastatic disease. In this study, we examined the effects of antisense cyclin
G1, in comparison with antisense cyclin D1 (CYCD1) and enforced expression of the
universal cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1 on the proliferation of 
human MG-63 osteosarcoma cells. Retroviral vectors bearing antisense CYCG1 as
well as antisense CYCD1 and WAF1/CIP1 (in sense orientation) driven by the
Moloney murine leukemia virus long terminal repeat promoter inhibited the growth 
and/or survival of transduced MG-63 cells in 2-7 day cultures. This represents
the first demonstration that cyclin G1 is essential for the survival and/or
growth of human osteosarcoma cells. Cytostatic and cytopathic effects were
accompanied by a significant increase in the incidence of apoptosis, as
determined by immunocytochemical analysis of DNA fragmentation. Furthermore,
transduction of MG-63 cells with a retroviral vector bearing the suicide gene,
herpes simplex thymidine kinase (HStk), induced cell death on treatment with
ganciclovir, exhibiting pronounced bystander effects. Taken together, the data
affirm the feasibility of modulating inducible cell cycle control enzymes as a
potential gene therapy approach in the clinical management of osteogenic sarcoma.


PMID: 7585620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1995 Jun;45(6):554-60.

1H and 13C NMR assignments and molecular modelling of a minor groove DNA-binding 
peptide from the HMG-I protein.

Evans JN(1), Zajicek J, Nissen MS, Munske G, Smith V, Reeves R.

The HMG-I subfamily of high mobility group (HMG) chromatin proteins consists of
DNA-binding proteins that preferentially bind to stretches of A.T-rich sequence
both in vitro and in vivo. Recently, members of the HMG-I family have been
suggested to bind in vitro to the narrow minor groove of A.T-DNA by means of an
11 amino acid peptide binding domain (BD) which, because of its predicted
structure, is called the 'A.T-hook motif' [Reeves, R. & Nissen, M. (1990) J.
Biol. Chem. 265, 8573-8582], and would appear to be crescent-shaped. A BD peptide
with 13 amino-acid residues was synthesized and examined by proton and carbon-13 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The peptide contains four proline 
residues, and on the basis of NOEs and 13C chemical shifts was found to exist in 
an all-trans conformation. Molecular modelling based on this result provides
evidence for a dynamic equilibrium between turn-like conformations in solution,
the most populated of which is likely to be an S-shaped conformer, on the basis
of amide exchange data.


PMID: 7558586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 1982 Mar 25;257(6):2802-5.

A high molecular weight nuclear basic protein from the bivalve mollusc Spisula
solidissima.

Ausió J, Subirana JA.

A basic protein has been isolated from sperm of the bivalve Spisula solidissima. 
Its characteristics are reminiscent of both histone H1 and of fish protamines. It
is unusual in several respects: it contains similar amounts of lysine (24.8%) and
arginine (23.1%), plus a residue of tryptophan per molecule. Its size is very
large, approximately 297 amino acid residues. It shows a tendency to aggregate,
an unusual property given the strongly charged nature of this protein.


PMID: 7061451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biochemistry. 1984 Nov 6;23(23):5622-8.

Differential dissociation of histone tails from core chromatin.

Walker IO.

The dissociation of the trypsin-sensitive basic tails of the core histones in
core chromatin has been followed as a function of [NaCl] using proton NMR
spectroscopy. The tails dissociate in a highly cooperative all or none manner
over the salt concentration range 0.2-0.6 M, that is, below the salt
concentration required to dissociate the complete molecule. Assuming that each
basic tail dissociates independently, the total number of salt linkages involved 
in binding the tails to DNA is 103. This equals the number of basic side chains
in the tails of an octamer. The standard free energy of dissociation, delta G
degree, in 1 M NaCl at 297 K is 3.6 kcal/mol. Temperature had no effect on the
extent of dissociation up to 45 degrees C. However, between 45 and 65 degrees C, 
where the premelting transition in the core chromatin occurs, the tails
dissociated completely. Dissociation of the tails was associated with a
conformational transition in the DNA consistent with loss of supercoiling. From
this, and the results of a previous study, it can be shown that the structured,
trypsin-resistant domain of each core histone octamer makes 100 salt linkages to 
DNA. Thus, in 10 mM salt, each core octamer makes a total of 203 salt linkages to
DNA.


PMID: 6509040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Eur J Biochem. 1970 Jul;14(3):486-97.

An investigation of the conformational changes in histones F1 and F2a1 by proton 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy.

Boublík M, Bradbury EM, Crane-Robinson C.


PMID: 5530727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biopolymers. 1972 Feb;11(2):375-97.

Conformational changes in histone IV.

Li HJ, Wickett R, Craig AM, Isenberg I.

DOI: 10.1002/bip.1972.360110206 
PMID: 5016554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biochemistry. 1974 May 7;13(10):2093-8.

Conformational changes of histone LAK (f2a2).

D'Anna JA Jr, Isenberg I.


PMID: 4857059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biochemistry. 1974 Nov 19;13(24):4987-92.

Conformational changes of histone ARE(F3, III).

D'Anna JA Jr, Isenberg I.


PMID: 4474008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Biochemistry. 1972 Aug 1;11(16):2952-7.

Salt effects on histone IV conformation.

Wickett RR, Li HJ, Isenberg I.


PMID: 4339475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biochemistry. 1987 Feb 24;26(4):975-82.

Structural characterization of the trypsin-resistant core in the nuclear
sperm-specific protein from Spisula solidissima.

Ausio J, Toumadje A, McParland R, Becker RR, Johnson WC Jr, van Holde KE.

Trypsin digestion of the protamine-like protein from Spisula solidissima has
revealed the existence of an internal resistant core. The peptide contains 75
amino acid residues, and its primary structure shows some conserved sequences
that are common to those found in the core of the somatic histone H5 from chicken
erythrocytes. The secondary structure of this core exhibits 33% antiparallel
beta-sheet, 18% beta-turns, 37% random coil, and only 10% alpha-helix, in
contrast to histone H5. Hydrodynamic measurements indicate a compact globular
assembly for the tertiary structure of this peptide, when compared to the more
extended shape observed for the whole protein. The possible relatedness of this
protein to the histone H1 family is discussed.


PMID: 3567164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Biochem Int. 1988 May;16(5):963-71.

A conformational study of the sequence specific binding of HMG-I (Y) with the
bovine interleukin-2 cDNA.

Lehn DA(1), Elton TS, Johnson KR, Reeves R.

The DNA sequence specific interaction of the high mobility group non-histone
protein HMG-I (Y) with the 3' untranslated region of the bovine interleukin-2
cDNA has been studied. Circular dichroism and thermal denaturation studies
suggest that HMG-I (Y) alters the conformational state and increases the thermal 
stability of the DNA. Additionally, amino acid sequence analysis suggests that
the previously identified non-histone protein HMG-Y is an isoform of HMG-I.


PMID: 3262346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Biochemistry. 1987 Sep 8;26(18):5916-25.

Secondary structure determination of human beta-endorphin by 1H NMR spectroscopy.

Lichtarge O(1), Jardetzky O, Li CH.

The 1H NMR spectra of human beta-endorphin indicate that the peptide exists in
random-coil form in aqueous solution but becomes helical in mixed solvent.
Thermal denaturation NMR experiments show that in water there is no transition
between 24 and 75 degrees C, while a slow noncooperative thermal unfolding is
observed in a 60% methanol-40% water mixed solvent in the same temperature range.
These findings are consistent with circular dichroism studies by other workers
concluding that beta-endorphin is a random coil in water but that it forms 50%
alpha-helix or more in mixed solvents. The peptide in the mixed water-methanol
solvent was further studied by correlated spectroscopy (COSY) and nuclear
Overhauser effect spectroscopy (NOESY) experiments. These allow a complete set of
assignments to be made and establish two distinct stretches over which the
solvent induces formation of alpha-helices: the first occurs between Tyr-1 and
Thr-12 and the second between Leu-14 and extending to Lys-28. There is evidence
that the latter is capped by a turn occurring between Lys-28 and Glu-31. These
helices form at the enkephalin receptor binding site, which is at the amino
terminus, and at the morphine receptor binding site, located at the carboxyl
terminus [Li, C. H. (1982) Cell (Cambridge, Mass.) 31, 504-505]. Our findings
suggest that these two receptors may specifically recognize alpha-helices.


PMID: 2960378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. FEBS Lett. 1987 May 4;215(1):88-94.

A 1H-NMR study of the solution conformation of secretin. Resonance assignment and
secondary structure.

Gronenborn AM, Bovermann G, Clore GM.

The solution conformation of the 27 residue polypeptide hormone secretin has been
investigated by 1H-NMR spectroscopy under conditions where it adopts a fully
ordered structure as judged by circular dichroism spectroscopy, namely in an
aqueous solution of 40% (v/v) trifluoroethanol. Using a combination of
two-dimensional NMR techniques the 1H-NMR spectrum of secretin is completely
assigned and its secondary structure is determined from a qualitative
interpretation of the nuclear Overhauser enhancement data. It is shown that under
these conditions secretin adopts a conformation consisting of an N-terminal
irregular strand (residues 1-6) followed by two helices (residues 7-13 and 17-25)
connected by a 'half-turn' (residues 14-16); the last two residues (26 and 27)
are again irregular. This conformation is shown to be very similar to that of
glucagon in perdeuterated dodecylphosphocholine micelles and to that of the
active 1-29 fragment of growth hormone releasing factor in 30% (v/v)
trifluoroethanol:


PMID: 2883029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Science. 1987 Oct 23;238(4826):491-7.

New perspectives in cell adhesion: RGD and integrins.

Ruoslahti E(1), Pierschbacher MD.

Rapid progress has been made in the understanding of the molecular interactions
that result in cell adhesion. Many adhesive proteins present in extracellular
matrices and in the blood contain the tripeptide arginine-glycine-aspartic acid
(RGD) as their cell recognition site. These proteins include fibronectin,
vitronectin, osteopontin, collagens, thrombospondin, fibrinogen, and von
Willebrand factor. The RGD sequences of each of the adhesive proteins are
recognized by at least one member of a family of structurally related receptors, 
integrins, which are heterodimeric proteins with two membrane-spanning subunits. 
Some of these receptors bind to the RGD sequence of a single adhesion protein
only, whereas others recognize groups of them. The conformation of the RGD
sequence in the individual proteins may be critical to this recognition
specificity. On the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane, the receptors
connect the extracellular matrix to the cytoskeleton. More than ten proved or
suspected RGD-containing adhesion-promoting proteins have already been
identified, and the integrin family includes at least as many receptors
recognizing these proteins. Together, the adhesion proteins and their receptors
constitute a versatile recognition system providing cells with anchorage,
traction for migration, and signals for polarity, position, differentiation, and 
possibly growth.


PMID: 2821619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1989 Oct 16;164(1):567-74.

Isolation of a novel 38 residue-hypothalamic polypeptide which stimulates
adenylate cyclase in pituitary cells.

Miyata A(1), Arimura A, Dahl RR, Minamino N, Uehara A, Jiang L, Culler MD, Coy
DH.

A novel neuropeptide which stimulates adenylate cyclase in rat anterior pituitary
cell cultures was isolated from ovine hypothalamic tissues. Its amino acid
sequence was revealed as:
His-Ser-Asp-Gly-Ile-Phe-Thr-Asp-Ser-Tyr-Ser-Arg-Tyr-Arg-Lys-Gln- Met-Ala-
Val-Lys-Lys-Tyr-Leu-Ala-Ala-Val-Leu-Gly-Lys-Arg-Tyr-Lys-Gln-Arg-Val-Lys-Asn-Lys -
NH2. The N-terminal sequence shows 68% homology with vasoactive intestinal
polypeptide (VIP) but its adenylate cyclase stimulating activity was at least
1000 times greater than that of VIP. It increased release of growth hormone (GH),
prolactin (PRL), corticotropin (ACTH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) from
superfused rat pituitary cells at as small a dose as 10(-10)M (GH, PRL, ACTH) or 
10(-9)M (LH). Whether these hypophysiotropic effects are the primary actions of
the peptide or what physiological action in the pituitary is linked with the
stimulation of adenylate cyclase by this peptide remains to be determined.


PMID: 2803320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Mol Biol. 1990 Oct 5;215(3):403-10.

Basic local alignment search tool.

Altschul SF(1), Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ.

A new approach to rapid sequence comparison, basic local alignment search tool
(BLAST), directly approximates alignments that optimize a measure of local
similarity, the maximal segment pair (MSP) score. Recent mathematical results on 
the stochastic properties of MSP scores allow an analysis of the performance of
this method as well as the statistical significance of alignments it generates.
The basic algorithm is simple and robust; it can be implemented in a number of
ways and applied in a variety of contexts including straightforward DNA and
protein sequence database searches, motif searches, gene identification searches,
and in the analysis of multiple regions of similarity in long DNA sequences. In
addition to its flexibility and tractability to mathematical analysis, BLAST is
an order of magnitude faster than existing sequence comparison tools of
comparable sensitivity.

DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80360-2 
PMID: 2231712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Cell Biol. 1991 Mar;112(5):781-3.

Differentiation requires continuous regulation.

Blau HM(1), Baltimore D.


PMCID: PMC2288865
PMID: 1999456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Nov 15;88(22):10148-52.

The nucleosomal core histone octamer at 3.1 A resolution: a tripartite protein
assembly and a left-handed superhelix.

Arents G(1), Burlingame RW, Wang BC, Love WE, Moudrianakis EN.

The structure of the octameric histone core of the nucleosome has been determined
by x-ray crystallography to a resolution of 3.1 A. The histone octamer is a
tripartite assembly in which a centrally located (H3-H4)2 tetramer is flanked by 
two H2A-H2B dimers. It has a complex outer surface; depending on the perspective,
the structure appears as a wedge or as a flat disk. The disk represents the
planar projection of a left-handed proteinaceous superhelix with approximately 28
A pitch. The diameter of the particle is 65 A and the length is 60 A at its
maximum and approximately 10 A at its minimum extension; these dimensions are in 
agreement with those reported earlier by Klug et al. [Klug, A., Rhodes, D.,
Smith, J., Finch, J. T. & Thomas, J. O. (1980) Nature (London) 287, 509-516]. The
folded histone chains are elongated rather than globular and are assembled in a
characteristic "handshake" motif. The individual polypeptides share a common
central structural element of the helix-loop-helix type, which we name the
histone fold.


PMCID: PMC52885
PMID: 1946434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Science. 1991 Jul 5;253(5015):49-53.

p53 mutations in human cancers.

Hollstein M(1), Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Harris CC.

Mutations in the evolutionarily conserved codons of the p53 tumor suppressor gene
are common in diverse types of human cancer. The p53 mutational spectrum differs 
among cancers of the colon, lung, esophagus, breast, liver, brain,
reticuloendothelial tissues, and hemopoietic tissues. Analysis of these mutations
can provide clues to the etiology of these diverse tumors and to the function of 
specific regions of p53. Transitions predominate in colon, brain, and lymphoid
malignancies, whereas G:C to T:A transversions are the most frequent
substitutions observed in cancers of the lung and liver. Mutations at A:T base
pairs are seen more frequently in esophageal carcinomas than in other solid
tumors. Most transitions in colorectal carcinomas, brain tumors, leukemias, and
lymphomas are at CpG dinucleotide mutational hot spots. G to T transversions in
lung, breast, and esophageal carcinomas are dispersed among numerous codons. In
liver tumors in persons from geographic areas in which both aflatoxin B1 and
hepatitis B virus are cancer risk factors, most mutations are at one nucleotide
pair of codon 249. These differences may reflect the etiological contributions of
both exogenous and endogenous factors to human carcinogenesis.


PMID: 1905840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Adv Cancer Res. 1991;56:253-312.

Chemistry and biology of alpha-fetoprotein.

Deutsch HF(1).

Alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP) is a product of specific fetal tissues and of neoplastic 
cells of hepatocyte or germ cell origin in adults. This protein belongs to a gene
family that is phylogenetically most closely related to serum albumin. Its
primary, secondary, and tertiary structural aspects appear similar to the
three-domain concept proposed for the latter protein. The primary sequence of AFP
departs most widely from serum albumin in the first 135 amino acid residues, with
about 42% of the remaining 590 residues of the human proteins being identical.
Some evidence exists that there are limited sequence differences in the AFP of a 
given animal species. AFP shows considerable charge heterogeneity that appears to
relate mostly to its glycoid moiety. The proteins of some species such as the rat
show more pronounced heterogeneities than that of humans. The variations in
extent and type of glycosylations are evidenced by differences in the binding to 
various lectins. These interactions are being extensively explored in attempts to
differentiate the sources of the protein produced by various normal and
neoplastic cells and may provide valuable diagnostic methods. AFP, like serum
albumin, shows relatively strong binding affinities for a variety of ligands. The
most notable difference is the strong preferential binding of polyunsaturated
fatty acids by AFP. This protein may play a role in transporting these substances
to developing and to malignant cells. Various agents affect the synthesis of this
protein both by specific fetal tissues and by neoplastic cells. Marked
differences in the responses of cells, particularly those of neoplastic types,
are indicative of variations in the genetic factors responsible for control of
its synthesis. The subject of the genomic repression of the synthesis of AFP seen
in fetal life upon maturation of the liver and the reoccurrence of synthesis upon
malignant conversion of hepatocytes and of certain germ cells are of particular
interest. The regulation of the closely related AFP and albumin genes is
providing a powerful and attractive model to examine molecular events in the
activation and inactivation of specific genes during development and in oncogenic
processes. Extensive measurements of AFP during pregnancy and in the course of
neoplasias, notably hepatoma, are being made to aid in following changes in such 
developments. Various specific physiological roles for this protein are also
being proposed. One of these is its possible action in the regulation of immune
processes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)


PMID: 1709334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Jun 30;185(3):967-73.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationships of elafin, an elastase-specific
inhibitor.

Tsunemi M(1), Kato H, Nishiuchi Y, Kumagaye S, Sakakibara S.

Elafin, an elastase-specific inhibitor isolated from human skin, and its related 
peptides were synthesized by the solution procedure, and their inhibitory
activities were measured against various enzymes. During the oxidative folding
reactions of the reduced peptides, the ratio of the active product to the
inactive product was varied by changing the concentration of guanidine HCl and
the amount of redox reagents. The disulfide structures of fully active synthetic 
elafin and the inactive product were determined by amino acid analysis, gas-phase
sequencing and mass spectrometry of their proteolytic fragments. The relationship
between structure and inhibitory activities and/or the folding reaction was
examined and the amino terminal part of the elafin molecule was found to have a
great influence on the folding reactions, but not on the inhibitory activities.


PMID: 1627147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Regul Pept. 1992 Feb 18;37(3):287-303.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP): discovery and current
status of research.

Arimura A(1).

For last 2 years since PACAP was first discovered, many important findings on
PACAP have been reported. cDNAs encoding the precursor proteins of PACAP in
sheep, human and rat were cloned, and the precursor proteins characterized. PACAP
was found in a high concentration in the central nervous system, adrenal medulla 
and testis. Immunohistochemical study indicated that PACAP containing neural
fibers are present throughout the brain, including both internal and external
zones of the median eminence. In the hypothalamus many PACAP positive cell bodies
were demonstrated in the supraoptic nucleus and the paraventricular nucleus in
various species. Four types of high affinity PACAP receptor were demonstrated.
PACAP receptors in the central nervous system, pituitary, adrenal medulla and
germ cells of the testis are highly specific for PACAP, and not shared with VIP. 
The PACAP receptor was solubilized and cross-linking of 125I-PACAP27 with the
binding protein suggest that the molecular weight of the receptor is around
57,000. Various biological actions of PACAP were reported, but the physiological 
cellular events linked with PACAP-induced activation of adenylate cyclase remain 
to be investigated.


PMID: 1313597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Annu Rev Biochem. 1979;48:159-91.

Histones.

Isenberg I.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.bi.48.070179.001111 
PMID: 382983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

