
1. Mol Syst Biol. 2018 May 22;14(5):e8377. doi: 10.15252/msb.20188377.

High-throughput discovery of functional disordered regions.

Ali M(1), Ivarsson Y(1).


PMCID: PMC5974509
PMID: 29789308 


2. Chembiochem. 2018 May 4;19(9):895-901. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201700691. Epub 2018 Mar 22.

The Un(f)told Story of General Anesthesia.

Zsila F(1).

Inhalational anesthetics are routinely employed in clinical practice to
accomplish general anesthesia. Concerns have recently emerged regarding the
deleterious impact of these volatile agents on cognitive performance, immune
functions, and tumor recurrence and metastasis. These agents have been shown to
modify the gene-expression pattern as well as cell signaling in tumor cells, but 
the underlying molecular mechanisms remain a matter of conjecture.
Regulatory/signaling proteins either of cytosolic or membrane origin abundantly
contain intrinsically disordered sequences, the conformational pliability of
which is pivotal in their biological functions. It is well known that chloroform 
(an anesthetic itself), trifluoroethanol, hexafluoroisopropanol, and related
haloalcohols markedly affect the structure of disordered proteins and protein
regions by inducing folding, misfolding, or even aggregation. Taking into
consideration the physicochemical similarities and protein interaction modes of
these volatile solvents and inhaled anesthetics, it is postulated that
administration of these drugs can also modify the secondary structure of
disordered protein segments. Accordingly, pharmacological effects of anesthetics 
may, at least in part, be mediated by conformational perturbations of intrinsic
disorder-based regulatory protein networks of cells.

Â© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201700691 
PMID: 29399928 


3. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2017 Dec 27:1-14. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2017.1415822. [Epub ahead of print]

Sequence fingerprints distinguish erroneous from correct predictions of
intrinsically disordered protein regions.

Saravanan KM(1), Dunker AK(2), Krishnaswamy S(3).

More than 60 prediction methods for intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) have
been developed over the years, many of which are accessible on the World Wide
Web. Nearly, all of these predictors give balanced accuracies in the ~65%-~80%
range. Since predictors are not perfect, further studies are required to uncover 
the role of amino acid residues in native IDP as compared to predicted IDP
regions. In the present work, we make use of sequences of 100% predicted IDP
regions, false positive disorder predictions, and experimentally determined IDP
regions to distinguish the characteristics of native versus predicted IDP
regions. A higher occurrence of asparagine is observed in sequences of native IDP
regions but not in sequences of false positive predictions of IDP regions. The
occurrences of certain combinations of amino acids at the pentapeptide level
provide a distinguishing feature in the IDPs with respect to globular proteins.
The distinguishing features presented in this paper provide insights into the
sequence fingerprints of amino acid residues in experimentally determined as
compared to predicted IDP regions. These observations and additional work along
these lines should enable the development of improvements in the accuracy of
disorder prediction algorithm.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2017.1415822 
PMID: 29228892 


4. Molecules. 2017 Nov 24;22(12). pii: E2027. doi: 10.3390/molecules22122027.

Intrinsic Disorder in Proteins with Pathogenic Repeat Expansions.

Darling AL(1)(2), Uversky VN(1)(3).

Intrinsically disordered proteins and proteins with intrinsically disordered
regions have been shown to be highly prevalent in disease. Furthermore,
disease-causing expansions of the regions containing tandem amino acid repeats
often push repetitive proteins towards formation of irreversible aggregates. In
fact, in disease-relevant proteins, the increased repeat length often positively 
correlates with the increased aggregation efficiency and the increased disease
severity and penetrance, being negatively correlated with the age of disease
onset. The major categories of repeat extensions involved in disease include
poly-glutamine and poly-alanine homorepeats, which are often times located in the
intrinsically disordered regions, as well as repeats in non-coding regions of
genes typically encoding proteins with ordered structures. Repeats in such
non-coding regions of genes can be expressed at the mRNA level. Although they can
affect the expression levels of encoded proteins, they are not translated as
parts of an affected protein and have no effect on its structure. However, in
some cases, the repetitive mRNAs can be translated in a non-canonical manner,
generating highly repetitive peptides of different length and amino acid
composition. The repeat extension-caused aggregation of a repetitive protein may 
represent a pivotal step for its transformation into a proteotoxic entity that
can lead to pathology. The goals of this article are to systematically analyze
molecular mechanisms of the proteinopathies caused by the poly-glutamine and
poly-alanine homorepeat expansion, as well as by the polypeptides generated as a 
result of the microsatellite expansions in non-coding gene regions and to examine
the related proteins. We also present results of the analysis of the prevalence
and functional roles of intrinsic disorder in proteins associated with
pathological repeat expansions.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules22122027 
PMID: 29186753 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
founding sponsors had no role in the design of the study; in the collection,
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the
decision to publish the results.


5. Mol Biosyst. 2017 Sep 26;13(10):2044-2055. doi: 10.1039/c7mb00230k.

Protein intrinsic disorder negatively associates with gene age in different
eukaryotic lineages.

Banerjee S(1), Chakraborty S.

The emergence of new protein-coding genes in a specific lineage or species
provides raw materials for evolutionary adaptations. Until recently, the biology 
of new genes emerging particularly from non-genic sequences remained unexplored. 
Although the new genes are subjected to variable selection pressure and face
rapid deletion, some of them become functional and are retained in the gene pool.
To acquire functional novelties, new genes often get integrated into the
pre-existing ancestral networks. However, the mechanism by which young proteins
acquire novel interactions remains unanswered till date. Since structural
orientation contributes hugely to the mode of proteins' physical interactions, in
this regard, we put forward an interesting question - Do new genes encode
proteins with stable folds? Addressing the question, we demonstrated that the
intrinsic disorder inversely correlates with the evolutionary gene ages - i.e.
young proteins are richer in intrinsic disorder than the ancient ones. We further
noted that young proteins, which are initially poorly connected hubs, prefer to
be structurally more disordered than well-connected ancient proteins. The
phenomenon strikingly defies the usual trend of well-connected proteins being
highly disordered in structure. We justified that structural disorder might help 
poorly connected young proteins to undergo promiscuous interactions, which
provides the foundation for novel protein interactions. The study focuses on the 
evolutionary perspectives of young proteins in the light of structural
adaptations.

DOI: 10.1039/c7mb00230k 
PMID: 28783193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2017 Sep;74(17):3069-3090. doi: 10.1007/s00018-017-2555-4.
Epub 2017 Jun 6.

Comprehensive review of methods for prediction of intrinsic disorder and its
molecular functions.

Meng F(1), Uversky VN(2)(3), Kurgan L(4).

Computational prediction of intrinsic disorder in protein sequences dates back to
late 1970 and has flourished in the last two decades. We provide a brief
historical overview, and we review over 30 recent predictors of disorder. We are 
the first to also cover predictors of molecular functions of disorder, including 
13 methods that focus on disordered linkers and disordered protein-protein,
protein-RNA, and protein-DNA binding regions. We overview their predictive
models, usability, and predictive performance. We highlight newest methods and
predictors that offer strong predictive performance measured based on recent
comparative assessments. We conclude that the modern predictors are relatively
accurate, enjoy widespread use, and many of them are fast. Their predictions are 
conveniently accessible to the end users, via web servers and databases that
store pre-computed predictions for millions of proteins. However, research into
methods that predict many not yet addressed functions of intrinsic disorder
remains an outstanding challenge.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-017-2555-4 
PMID: 28589442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Proteins. 2017 Sep;85(9):1593-1601. doi: 10.1002/prot.25323. Epub 2017 Jun 10.

Sequence-based analysis of protein degradation rates.

Correa Marrero M(1), van Dijk ADJ(1)(2)(3), de Ridder D(1).

Protein turnover is a key aspect of cellular homeostasis and proteome dynamics.
However, there is little consensus on which properties of a protein determine its
lifetime in the cell. In this work, we exploit two reliable datasets of
experimental protein degradation rates to learn models and uncover determinants
of protein degradation, with particular focus on properties that can be derived
from the sequence. Our work shows that simple sequence features suffice to obtain
predictive models of which the output correlates reasonably well with the
experimentally measured values. We also show that intrinsic disorder may have a
larger effect than previously reported, and that the effect of PEST regions, long
thought to act as specific degradation signals, can be better explained by their 
disorder. We also find that determinants of protein degradation depend on the
cell types or experimental conditions studied. This analysis serves as a first
step towards the development of more complex, mature computational models of
degradation of proteins and eventually of their full life cycle. Proteins 2017;
85:1593-1601. Â© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Â© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.25323 
PMID: 28547871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Curr Protoc Protein Sci. 2017 Apr 3;88:2.16.1-2.16.14. doi: 10.1002/cpps.28.

Computational Prediction of Intrinsic Disorder in Proteins.

Meng F(1), Uversky V(2)(3), Kurgan L(4).

Computational prediction of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) is a mature 
research field. These methods predict disordered residues and regions in an input
protein chain. More than 60 predictors of IDPs have been developed. This unit
defines computational prediction of intrinsic disorder, summarizes major types of
predictors of disorder, and provides details about three accurate and recently
released methods. We demonstrate the use of these methods to predict intrinsic
disorder for several illustrative proteins, provide insights into how predictions
should be interpreted, and quantify and discuss predictive performance.
Predictions can be freely and conveniently obtained using webservers. We point to
the availability of databases that provide access to annotations of intrinsic
disorder determined by structural studies and putative intrinsic disorder
pre-computed by computational methods. Lastly, we also summarize experimental
methods that can be used to validate computational predictions. Â© 2017 by John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright Â© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cpps.28 
PMID: 28369666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2017 Mar 1;5(1):e1287505. doi:
10.1080/21690707.2017.1287505. eCollection 2017.

Quarterly intrinsic disorder digest (April-May-June, 2014).

DeForte S(1), Uversky VN(2).

This is the 6th issue of the Digested Disorder series that continues to use only 
2 criteria for inclusion of a paper to this digest: The publication date (a paper
should be published within the covered time frame) and the topic (a paper should 
be dedicated to any aspect of protein intrinsic disorder). The current digest
issue covers papers published during the second quarter of 2014; i.e., during the
period of April, May, and June of 2014. Similar to previous issues, the papers
are grouped hierarchically by topics they cover, and for each of the included
papers a short description is given on its major findings.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2017.1287505 
PMCID: PMC5345852
PMID: 28321370 


10. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2017 Mar;35(4):836-856. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2016.1164077. 
Epub 2016 Apr 4.

Abundance and functional roles of intrinsic disorder in the antimicrobial
peptides of the NK-lysin family.

Yacoub HA(1)(2), Al-Maghrabi OA(1), Ahmed ES(2), Uversky VN(3)(4)(5).

NK-lysins are antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) that participate in the innate immune
response and also have several pivotal roles in various biological processes.
Such multifunctionality is commonly found among intrinsically disordered
proteins. However, NK-lysins have never been systematically analyzed for
intrinsic disorder. To fill this gap, the amino acid sequences of NK-lysins from 
various species were collected from UniProt and used for the comprehensive
computational analysis to evaluate the propensity of these proteins for intrinsic
disorder and to investigate the potential roles of disordered regions in NK-lysin
functions. We analyzed abundance and peculiarities of intrinsic disorder
distribution in all-known NK-lysins and showed that many NK-lysins are expected
to have substantial levels of intrinsic disorder. Curiously, high level of
intrinsic disorder was also found even in two proteins with known 3D-strucutres
(NK-lysin from pig and human granulysin). Many of the identified disordered
regions can be involved in protein-protein interactions. In fact, NK-lysins are
shown to contain three to eight molecular recognition features; i.e. short
structure-prone segments which are located within the long disordered regions and
have a potential to undergo a disorder-to-order transition upon binding to a
partner. Furthermore, these disordered regions are expected to have several sites
of various posttranslational modifications. Our study shows that NK-lysins, which
are AMPs with a set of prominent roles in the innate immune response, are
expected to abundantly possess intrinsically disordered regions that might be
related to multifunctionality of these proteins in the signal transduction
pathways controlling the host response to pathogenic agents.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2016.1164077 
PMID: 26957115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. PLoS Comput Biol. 2017 Feb 13;13(2):e1005398. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005398. 
eCollection 2017 Feb.

Conformational diversity analysis reveals three functional mechanisms in
proteins.

Monzon AM(1), Zea DJ(2), Fornasari MS(1), SaldaÃ±o TE(1), Fernandez-Alberti S(1), 
Tosatto SC(3), Parisi G(1).

Protein motions are a key feature to understand biological function. Recently, a 
large-scale analysis of protein conformational diversity showed a positively
skewed distribution with a peak at 0.5 Ã C-alpha root-mean-square-deviation
(RMSD). To understand this distribution in terms of structure-function
relationships, we studied a well curated and large dataset of ~5,000 proteins
with experimentally determined conformational diversity. We searched for global
behaviour patterns studying how structure-based features change among the
available conformer population for each protein. This procedure allowed us to
describe the RMSD distribution in terms of three main protein classes sharing
given properties. The largest of these protein subsets (~60%), which we call
"rigid" (average RMSD = 0.83 Ã), has no disordered regions, shows low
conformational diversity, the largest tunnels and smaller and buried cavities.
The two additional subsets contain disordered regions, but with differential
sequence composition and behaviour. Partially disordered proteins have on average
67% of their conformers with disordered regions, average RMSD = 1.1 Ã, the
highest number of hinges and the longest disordered regions. In contrast,
malleable proteins have on average only 25% of disordered conformers and average 
RMSD = 1.3 Ã, flexible cavities affected in size by the presence of disordered
regions and show the highest diversity of cognate ligands. Proteins in each set
are mostly non-homologous to each other, share no given fold class, nor
functional similarity but do share features derived from their conformer
population. These shared features could represent conformational mechanisms
related with biological functions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005398 
PMCID: PMC5330503
PMID: 28192432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jan 4;45(D1):D228-D235. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1019. Epub
2016 Oct 28.

FuzDB: database of fuzzy complexes, a tool to develop stochastic
structure-function relationships for protein complexes and higher-order
assemblies.

Miskei M(1), Antal C(1), Fuxreiter M(2).

FuzDB (http://protdyn-database.org) compiles experimentally observed fuzzy
protein complexes, where intrinsic disorder (ID) is maintained upon interacting
with a partner (protein, nucleic acid or small molecule) and directly impacts
biological function. Entries in the database have both (i) structural evidence
demonstrating the structural multiplicity or dynamic disorder of the ID region(s)
in the partner bound form of the protein and (ii) in vitro or in vivo biological 
evidence that indicates the significance of the fuzzy region(s) in the formation,
function or regulation of the assembly. Unlike the other intrinsically disordered
or unfolded protein databases, FuzDB focuses on ID regions within a biological
context, including higher-order assemblies and presents a detailed analysis of
the structural and functional data. FuzDB also provides interpretation of
experimental results to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which fuzzy
regions-classified on the basis of topology and mechanism-interfere with the
structural ensembles and activity of protein assemblies. Regulatory sites
generated by alternative splicing (AS) or post-translational modifications (PTMs)
are also collected. By assembling all this information, FuzDB could be utilized
to develop stochastic structure-function relationships for proteins and could
contribute to the emergence of a new paradigm.

Â© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw1019 
PMCID: PMC5210525
PMID: 27794553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Acta Biochim Pol. 2017;64(1):99-111. doi: 10.18388/abp.2016_1300. Epub 2016 Nov
7.

Electronegativity and intrinsic disorder of preeclampsia-related proteins.

Polanco C(1), CastaÃ±Ã³n-GonzÃ¡lez JA(2), Uversky VN(3)(4), Buhse T(5), Samaniego
Mendoza JL(1), Calva JJ(6).

Preeclampsia, hemorrhage, and infection are the leading causes of maternal death 
in underdeveloped countries. Since several proteins associated with preeclampsia 
are known, we conducted a computational study which evaluated the commonness and 
potential functionality of intrinsic disorder of these proteins and also made an 
attempt to characterize their origin. The origin of the preeclampsia-related
proteins was assessed with a supervised technique, a Polarity Index Method (PIM),
which evaluates the electronegativity of proteins based solely on their sequence.
The commonness of intrinsic disorder was evaluated using several disorder
predictors from the PONDR family, the charge-hydropathy plot (CH-plot) and
cumulative distribution function (CDF) analyses, and using the MobiDB web-based
tool, whereas potential functionality of intrinsic disorder was studied with the 
D2P2 resource and ANCHOR predictor of disorder-based binding sites, and the
STRING tool was used to build the interactivity networks of the
preeclampsia-related proteins. Peculiarities of the PIM-derived polar profile of 
the group of preeclampsia-related proteins were then compared with profiles of a 
group of lipoproteins, antimicrobial peptides, angiogenesis-related proteins, and
the intrinsically disordered proteins. Our results showed a high graphical
correlation between preeclampsia proteins, lipoproteins, and the angiogenesis
proteins. We also showed that many preeclampsia-related proteins contain numerous
functional disordered regions. Therefore, these bioinformatics results led us to 
assume that the preeclampsia proteins are highly associated with the lipoproteins
group, and that some preeclampsia-related proteins contain significant amounts of
functional disorders.

DOI: 10.18388/abp.2016_1300 
PMID: 27824362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Adv Colloid Interface Sci. 2017 Jan;239:97-114. doi: 10.1016/j.cis.2016.05.012.
Epub 2016 May 31.

Protein intrinsic disorder-based liquid-liquid phase transitions in biological
systems: Complex coacervates and membrane-less organelles.

Uversky VN(1).

It is clear now that eukaryotic cells contain numerous membrane-less organelles, 
many of which are formed in response to changes in the cellular environment.
Being typically liquid in nature, many of these organelles can be described as
products of the reversible and highly controlled liquid-liquid phase transitions 
in biological systems. Many of these membrane-less organelles are complex
coacervates containing (almost invariantly) intrinsically disordered proteins and
often nucleic acids. It seems that the lack of stable structure in major
proteinaceous constituents of these organelles is crucial for the formation of
phase-separated droplets. This review considers several biologically relevant
liquid-liquid phase transitions, introduces some general features attributed to
intrinsically disordered proteins, represents several illustrative examples of
intrinsic disorder-based phase separation, and provides some reasons for the
abundance of intrinsically disordered proteins in organelles formed as a result
of biological liquid-liquid phase transitions.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cis.2016.05.012 
PMID: 27291647 


15. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1484:159-174. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6406-2_12.

Intrinsic Disorder and Semi-disorder Prediction by SPINE-D.

Zhang T(1), Faraggi E(2)(3), Li Z(4), Zhou Y(5).

Over the past decade, it has become evident that a large proportion of proteins
contain intrinsically disordered regions, which play important roles in pivotal
cellular functions. Many computational tools have been developed with the aim of 
identifying the level and location of disorder within a protein. In this chapter,
we describe a neural network based technique called SPINE-D that employs a unique
three-state design and can accurately capture disordered residues in both short
and long disordered regions. SPINE-D was trained on a large database of 4229
non-redundant proteins, and yielded an AUC of 0.86 on a cross-validation test and
0.89 on an independent test. SPINE-D can also detect a semi-disordered state that
is associated with induced folders and aggregation-prone regions in disordered
proteins and weakly stable or locally unfolded regions in structured proteins. We
implement an online web service and an offline stand-alone program for SPINE-D,
they are freely available at http://sparks-lab.org/SPINE-D/ . We then walk you
through how to use the online and offline SPINE-D in making disorder predictions,
and examine the disorder and semi-disorder prediction in a case study on the p53 
protein.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6406-2_12 
PMID: 27787826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1484:137-158. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6406-2_11.

How to Predict Disorder in a Protein of Interest.

Uversky VN(1)(2)(3).

Currently available computational tools, which are many, provide a researcher
with the multitude of options for prediction of intrinsic disorder in a protein
of interest and for finding at least some of its disorder-based functions. This
chapter provides a highly subjective guideline on how not to be lost in the "dark
forest" of available tools for the analysis of intrinsic disorder. By no means it
gives a unique pathway through this forest, but simply presents some of the tools
the author uses in his everyday research.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6406-2_11 
PMID: 27787825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2016 Dec 21;4(1):e1259708. doi:
10.1080/21690707.2016.1259708. eCollection 2016.

How disordered is my protein and what is its disorder for? A guide through the
"dark side" of the protein universe.

Lieutaud P(1), Ferron F(1), Uversky AV(2), Kurgan L(3), Uversky VN(4), Longhi
S(1).

In the last 2 decades it has become increasingly evident that a large number of
proteins are either fully or partially disordered. Intrinsically disordered
proteins lack a stable 3D structure, are ubiquitous and fulfill essential
biological functions. Their conformational heterogeneity is encoded in their
amino acid sequences, thereby allowing intrinsically disordered proteins or
regions to be recognized based on properties of these sequences. The
identification of disordered regions facilitates the functional annotation of
proteins and is instrumental for delineating boundaries of protein domains
amenable to structural determination with X-ray crystallization. This article
discusses a comprehensive selection of databases and methods currently employed
to disseminate experimental and putative annotations of disorder, predict
disorder and identify regions involved in induced folding. It also provides a set
of detailed instructions that should be followed to perform computational
analysis of disorder.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2016.1259708 
PMCID: PMC5314888
PMID: 28232901 


18. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2016 Dec 15;4(1):e1262225. doi:
10.1080/21690707.2016.1262225. eCollection 2016.

Genes encoding intrinsic disorder in Eukaryota have high GC content.

Peng Z(1), Uversky VN(2), Kurgan L(3).

We analyze a correlation between the GC content in genes of 12 eukaryotic species
and the level of intrinsic disorder in their corresponding proteins.
Comprehensive computational analysis has revealed that the disordered regions in 
eukaryotes are encoded by the GC-enriched gene regions and that this enrichment
is correlated with the amount of disorder and is present across proteins and
species characterized by varying amounts of disorder. The GC enrichment is a
result of higher rate of amino acid coded by GC-rich codons in the disordered
regions. Individual amino acids have the same GC-content profile between
different species. Eukaryotic proteins with the disordered regions encoded by the
GC-enriched gene segments carry out important biological functions including
interactions with RNAs, DNAs, nucleotides, binding of calcium and metal ions, are
involved in transcription, transport, cell division and certain signaling
pathways, and are localized primarily in nucleus, cytosol and cytoplasm. We also 
investigate a possible relationship between GC content, intrinsic disorder and
protein evolution. Analysis of a devised "age" of amino acids, their
disorder-promoting capacity and the GC-enrichment of their codons suggests that
the early amino acids are mostly disorder-promoting and their codons are GC-rich 
while most of late amino acids are mostly order-promoting.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2016.1262225 
PMCID: PMC5314932
PMID: 28232902 


19. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2016 Dec 15;4(1):e1255295. doi:
10.1080/21690707.2016.1255295. eCollection 2016.

Intrinsic disorder in spondins and some of their interacting partners.

Alowolodu O(1), Johnson G(1), Alashwal L(1), Addou I(1), Zhdanova IV(2), Uversky 
VN(3).

Spondins, which are proteins that inhibit and promote adherence of embryonic
cells so as to aid axonal growth are part of the thrombospondin-1 family.
Spondins function in several important biological processes, such as apoptosis,
angiogenesis, etc. Spondins constitute a thrombospondin subfamily that includes
F-spondin, a protein that interacts with AÎ² precursor protein and inhibits its
proteolytic processing; R-spondin, a 4-membered group of proteins that regulates 
Wnt pathway and have other functions, such as regulation of kidney proliferation,
induction of epithelial proliferation, the tumor suppressant action; M-spondin
that mediates mechanical linkage between the muscles and apodemes; and the
SCO-spondin, a protein important for neuronal development. In this study, we
investigated intrinsic disorder status of human spondins and their interacting
partners, such as members of the LRP family, LGR family, Frizzled family, and
several other binding partners in order to establish the existence and importance
of disordered regions in spondins and their interacting partners by conducting a 
detailed analysis of their sequences, finding disordered regions, and
establishing a correlation between their structure and biological functions.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2016.1255295 
PMCID: PMC5314907
PMID: 28232900 


20. Protein Sci. 2016 Dec;25(12):2164-2174. doi: 10.1002/pro.3041. Epub 2016 Oct 25.

Large-scale analysis of intrinsic disorder flavors and associated functions in
the protein sequence universe.

Necci M(1), Piovesan D(1), Tosatto SC(1)(2).

Intrinsic disorder (ID) in proteins has been extensively described for the last
decade; a large-scale classification of ID in proteins is mostly missing. Here,
we provide an extensive analysis of ID in the protein universe on the UniProt
database derived from sequence-based predictions in MobiDB. Almost half the
sequences contain an ID region of at least five residues. About 9% of proteins
have a long ID region of over 20 residues which are more abundant in Eukaryotic
organisms and most frequently cover less than 20% of the sequence. A small subset
of about 67,000 (out of over 80 million) proteins is fully disordered and mostly 
found in Viruses. Most proteins have only one ID, with short ID evenly
distributed along the sequence and long ID overrepresented in the center. The
charged residue composition of Das and Pappu was used to classify ID proteins by 
structural propensities and corresponding functional enrichment. Swollen Coils
seem to be used mainly as structural components and in biosynthesis in both
Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes. In Bacteria, they are confined in the nucleoid and in
Viruses provide DNA binding function. Coils & Hairpins seem to be specialized in 
ribosome binding and methylation activities. Globules & Tadpoles bind antigens in
Eukaryotes but are involved in killing other organisms and cytolysis in Bacteria.
The Undefined class is used by Bacteria to bind toxic substances and mediate
transport and movement between and within organisms in Viruses. Fully disordered 
proteins behave similarly, but are enriched for glycine residues and
extracellular structures.

Â© 2016 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.3041 
PMCID: PMC5119570
PMID: 27636733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2016 Nov 15;11(11):e0166580. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0166580.
eCollection 2016.

Exploring Mouse Protein Function via Multiple Approaches.

Huang G(1), Chu C(2), Huang T(3), Kong X(3), Zhang Y(4), Zhang N(5), Cai YD(6).

Although the number of available protein sequences is growing exponentially,
functional protein annotations lag far behind. Therefore, accurate identification
of protein functions remains one of the major challenges in molecular biology. In
this study, we presented a novel approach to predict mouse protein functions. The
approach was a sequential combination of a similarity-based approach, an
interaction-based approach and a pseudo amino acid composition-based approach.
The method achieved an accuracy of about 0.8450 for the 1st-order predictions in 
the leave-one-out and ten-fold cross-validations. For the results yielded by the 
leave-one-out cross-validation, although the similarity-based approach alone
achieved an accuracy of 0.8756, it was unable to predict the functions of
proteins with no homologues. Comparatively, the pseudo amino acid
composition-based approach alone reached an accuracy of 0.6786. Although the
accuracy was lower than that of the previous approach, it could predict the
functions of almost all proteins, even proteins with no homologues. Therefore,
the combined method balanced the advantages and disadvantages of both approaches 
to achieve efficient performance. Furthermore, the results yielded by the
ten-fold cross-validation indicate that the combined method is still effective
and stable when there are no close homologs are available. However, the accuracy 
of the predicted functions can only be determined according to known protein
functions based on current knowledge. Many protein functions remain unknown. By
exploring the functions of proteins for which the 1st-order predicted functions
are wrong but the 2nd-order predicted functions are correct, the 1st-order
wrongly predicted functions were shown to be closely associated with the genes
encoding the proteins. The so-called wrongly predicted functions could also
potentially be correct upon future experimental verification. Therefore, the
accuracy of the presented method may be much higher in reality.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0166580 
PMCID: PMC5112993
PMID: 27846315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


22. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2016 Aug;73(15):2949-57. doi: 10.1007/s00018-016-2138-9. Epub 
2016 Jan 22.

Natural protein sequences are more intrinsically disordered than random
sequences.

Yu JF(1), Cao Z(1)(2), Yang Y(3), Wang CL(2), Su ZD(1), Zhao YW(1), Wang
JH(1)(2), Zhou Y(4)(5).

Most natural protein sequences have resulted from millions or even billions of
years of evolution. How they differ from random sequences is not fully
understood. Previous computational and experimental studies of random proteins
generated from noncoding regions yielded inclusive results due to
species-dependent codon biases and GC contents. Here, we approach this problem by
investigating 10,000 sequences randomized at the amino acid level. Using
well-established predictors for protein intrinsic disorder, we found that natural
sequences have more long disordered regions than random sequences, even when
random and natural sequences have the same overall composition of amino acid
residues. We also showed that random sequences are as structured as natural
sequences according to contents and length distributions of predicted secondary
structure, although the structures from random sequences may be in a molten
globular-like state, according to molecular dynamics simulations. The bias of
natural sequences toward more intrinsic disorder suggests that natural sequences 
are created and evolved to avoid protein aggregation and increase functional
diversity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-016-2138-9 
PMCID: PMC4937073
PMID: 26801222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Sci Data. 2016 Jun 21;3:160045. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2016.45.

A collection of intrinsic disorder characterizations from eukaryotic proteomes.

Vincent M(1), Schnell S(1)(2)(3).

Intrinsically disordered proteins and protein regions lack a stable
three-dimensional structure under physiological conditions. Several proteomic
investigations of intrinsic disorder have been performed to date and have found
disorder to be prevalent in eukaryotic proteomes. Here we present descriptive
statistics of intrinsic disorder features for ten model eukaryotic proteomes that
have been calculated from computational disorder prediction algorithms. The data 
descriptor also provides consensus disorder annotations as well as additional
physical parameters relevant to protein disorder, and further provides protein
existence information for all proteins included in our analysis. The complete
datasets can be downloaded freely, and it is envisaged that they will be updated 
periodically with new proteomes and protein disorder prediction algorithms. These
datasets will be especially useful for assessing protein disorder, and conducting
novel analyses that advance our understanding of intrinsic disorder and protein
structure.

DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2016.45 
PMCID: PMC4915274
PMID: 27326998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Biophys Chem. 2016 Jun;213:6-16. doi: 10.1016/j.bpc.2016.03.005. Epub 2016 Apr 5.

Quantitative proteome-based guidelines for intrinsic disorder characterization.

Vincent M(1), Whidden M(1), Schnell S(2).

Intrinsically disordered proteins fail to adopt a stable three-dimensional
structure under physiological conditions. It is now understood that many
disordered proteins are not dysfunctional, but instead engage in numerous
cellular processes, including signaling and regulation. Disorder characterization
from amino acid sequence relies on computational disorder prediction algorithms. 
While numerous large-scale investigations of disorder have been performed using
these algorithms, and have offered valuable insight regarding the prevalence of
protein disorder in many organisms, critical proteome-based descriptive
statistical guidelines that would enable the objective assessment of intrinsic
disorder in a protein of interest remain to be established. Here we present a
quantitative characterization of numerous disorder features using a rigorous
non-parametric statistical approach, providing expected values and percentile
cutoffs for each feature in ten eukaryotic proteomes. Our estimates utilize
multiple ab initio disorder prediction algorithms grounded on physicochemical
principles. Furthermore, we present novel threshold values, specific to both the 
prediction algorithms and the proteomes, defining the longest primary sequence
length in which the significance of a continuous disordered region can be
evaluated on the basis of length alone. The guidelines presented here are
intended to improve the interpretation of disorder content and continuous
disorder predictions from the proteomic point of view.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpc.2016.03.005 
PMID: 27085142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Protein Sci. 2016 Mar;25(3):676-88. doi: 10.1002/pro.2864. Epub 2016 Jan 9.

Resolving the ambiguity: Making sense of intrinsic disorder when PDB structures
disagree.

DeForte S(1), Uversky VN(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Missing regions in X-ray crystal structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) have
played a foundational role in the study of intrinsically disordered protein
regions (IDPRs), especially in the development of in silico predictors of
intrinsic disorder. However, a missing region is only a weak indication of
intrinsic disorder, and this uncertainty is compounded by the presence of
ambiguous regions, where more than one structure of the same protein sequence
"disagrees" in terms of the presence or absence of missing residues. The question
is this: are these ambiguous regions intrinsically disordered, or are they the
result of static disorder that arises from experimental conditions, ensembles of 
structures, or domain wobbling? A novel way of looking at ambiguous regions in
terms of the pattern between multiple PDB structures has been demonstrated. It
was found that the propensity for intrinsic disorder increases as the level of
ambiguity decreases. However, it is also shown that ambiguity is more likely to
occur as the protein region is placed within different environmental conditions, 
and even the most ambiguous regions as a set display compositional bias that
suggests flexibility. The results suggested that ambiguity is a natural result
for many IDPRs crystallized under different conditions and that static disorder
and wobbling domains are relatively rare. Instead, it is more likely that
ambiguity arises because many of these regions were conditionally or partially
disordered.

Â© 2016 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2864 
PMCID: PMC4815412 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26683124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2016 Feb 12;4(1):e1153395. doi:
10.1080/21690707.2016.1153395. eCollection 2016.

Quarterly intrinsic disorder digest (January-February-March, 2014).

DeForte S(1), Reddy KD(1), Uversky VN(2).

This is the 5th issue of the Digested Disorder series that represents a reader's 
digest of the scientific literature on intrinsically disordered proteins. We
continue to use only 2 criteria for inclusion of a paper to this digest: The
publication date (a paper should be published within the covered time frame) and 
the topic (a paper should be dedicated to any aspect of protein intrinsic
disorder). The current digest issue covers papers published during the first
quarter of 2014; i.e., during the period of January, February, and March of 2014.
Similar to previous issues, the papers are grouped hierarchically by topics they 
cover, and for each of the included papers a short description is given on its
major findings.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2016.1153395 
PMCID: PMC5314902
PMID: 28232896 


27. Front Mol Biosci. 2016 Feb 11;3:4. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2016.00004. eCollection
2016.

There is Diversity in Disorder-"In all Chaos there is a Cosmos, in all Disorder a
Secret Order".

Nielsen JT(1), Mulder FA(1).

The protein universe consists of a continuum of structures ranging from full
order to complete disorder. As the structured part of the proteome has been
intensively studied, stably folded proteins are increasingly well documented and 
understood. However, proteins that are fully, or in large part, disordered are
much less well characterized. Here we collected NMR chemical shifts in a small
database for 117 protein sequences that are known to contain disorder. We
demonstrate that NMR chemical shift data can be brought to bear as an exquisite
judge of protein disorder at the residue level, and help in validation. With the 
help of secondary chemical shift analysis we demonstrate that the proteins in the
database span the full spectrum of disorder, but still, largely segregate into
two classes; disordered with small segments of order scattered along the
sequence, and structured with small segments of disorder inserted between the
different structured regions. A detailed analysis reveals that the distribution
of order/disorder along the sequence shows a complex and asymmetric distribution,
that is highly protein-dependent. Access to ratified training data further
suggests an avenue to improving prediction of disorder from sequence.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2016.00004 
PMCID: PMC4749933
PMID: 26904549 


28. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1415:265-99. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3572-7_14.

Predicting Conformational Disorder.

Lieutaud P(1)(2), Ferron F(1)(2), Longhi S(3)(4).

In the last two decades, it has become increasingly evident that a large number
of proteins are either fully or partially disordered. Intrinsically disordered
proteins are ubiquitous proteins that fulfill essential biological functions
while lacking a stable 3D structure. Their conformational heterogeneity is
encoded at the amino acid sequence level, thereby allowing intrinsically
disordered proteins or regions to be recognized based on their sequence
properties. The identification of disordered regions facilitates the functional
annotation of proteins and is instrumental for delineating boundaries of protein 
domains amenable to crystallization. This chapter focuses on the methods
currently employed for predicting disorder and identifying regions involved in
induced folding.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3572-7_14 
PMID: 27115638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 29;112(52):15898-903. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1508380112. Epub 2015 Nov 17.

Unexpected features of the dark proteome.

PerdigÃ£o N(1), Heinrich J(2), Stolte C(2), Sabir KS(3), Buckley MJ(2), Tabor
B(2), Signal B(4), Gloss BS(4), Hammang CJ(4), Rost B(5), Schafferhans A(5),
O'Donoghue SI(6).

We surveyed the "dark" proteome-that is, regions of proteins never observed by
experimental structure determination and inaccessible to homology modeling. For
546,000 Swiss-Prot proteins, we found that 44-54% of the proteome in eukaryotes
and viruses was dark, compared with only â¼14% in archaea and bacteria.
Surprisingly, most of the dark proteome could not be accounted for by
conventional explanations, such as intrinsic disorder or transmembrane regions.
Nearly half of the dark proteome comprised dark proteins, in which the entire
sequence lacked similarity to any known structure. Dark proteins fulfill a wide
variety of functions, but a subset showed distinct and largely unexpected
features, such as association with secretion, specific tissues, the endoplasmic
reticulum, disulfide bonding, and proteolytic cleavage. Dark proteins also had
short sequence length, low evolutionary reuse, and few known interactions with
other proteins. These results suggest new research directions in structural and
computational biology.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1508380112 
PMCID: PMC4702990
PMID: 26578815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Nov;1848(11 Pt A):2839-48. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2015.08.002. Epub 2015 Aug 12.

Disordered regions in transmembrane proteins.

TusnÃ¡dy GE(1), Dobson L(2), Tompa P(3).

The functions of transmembrane proteins in living cells are widespread; they
range from various transport processes to energy production, from cell-cell
adhesion to communication. Structurally, they are highly ordered in their
membrane-spanning regions, but may contain disordered regions in the cytosolic
and extra-cytosolic parts. In this study, we have investigated the disordered
regions in transmembrane proteins by a stringent definition of disordered
residues on the currently available largest experimental dataset, and show a
significant correlation between the spatial distributions of positively charged
residues and disordered regions. This finding suggests a new role of disordered
regions in transmembrane proteins by providing structural flexibility for
stabilizing interactions with negatively charged head groups of the lipid
molecules. We also find a preference of structural disorder in the terminal--as
opposed to loop--regions in transmembrane proteins, and survey the respective
functions involved in recruiting other proteins or mediating allosteric signaling
effects. Finally, we critically compare disorder prediction methods on our
transmembrane protein set. While there are no major differences between these
methods using the usual statistics, such as per residue accuracies, Matthew's
correlation coefficients, etc.; substantial differences can be found regarding
the spatial distribution of the predicted disordered regions. We conclude that a 
predictor optimized for transmembrane proteins would be of high value to the
field of structural disorder.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2015.08.002 
PMID: 26275590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 11;5:14079. doi: 10.1038/srep14079.

Content of intrinsic disorder influences the outcome of cell-free protein
synthesis.

Tokmakov AA(1)(2), Kurotani A(3), Ikeda M(2)(4), Terazawa Y(2), Shirouzu M(2)(4),
Stefanov V(5), Sakurai T(3), Yokoyama S(2)(6).

Cell-free protein synthesis is used to produce proteins with various structural
traits. Recent bioinformatics analyses indicate that more than half of eukaryotic
proteins possess long intrinsically disordered regions. However, no systematic
study concerning the connection between intrinsic disorder and expression success
of cell-free protein synthesis has been presented until now. To address this
issue, we examined correlations of the experimentally observed cell-free protein 
expression yields with the contents of intrinsic disorder bioinformatically
predicted in the expressed sequences. This analysis revealed strong relationships
between intrinsic disorder and protein amenability to heterologous cell-free
expression. On the one hand, elevated disorder content was associated with the
increased ratio of soluble expression. On the other hand, overall propensity for 
detectable protein expression decreased with disorder content. We further
demonstrated that these tendencies are rooted in some distinct features of
intrinsically disordered regions, such as low hydrophobicity, elevated surface
accessibility and high abundance of sequence motifs for proteolytic degradation, 
including sites of ubiquitination and PEST sequences. Our findings suggest that
identification of intrinsically disordered regions in the expressed amino acid
sequences can be of practical use for predicting expression success and
optimizing cell-free protein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1038/srep14079 
PMCID: PMC4566126
PMID: 26359642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 7;16(7):15384-404. doi: 10.3390/ijms160715384.

An Overview of Practical Applications of Protein Disorder Prediction and Drive
for Faster, More Accurate Predictions.

Deng X(1), Gumm J(2), Karki S(3), Eickholt J(4), Cheng J(5)(6).

Protein disordered regions are segments of a protein chain that do not adopt a
stable structure. Thus far, a variety of protein disorder prediction methods have
been developed and have been widely used, not only in traditional bioinformatics 
domains, including protein structure prediction, protein structure determination 
and function annotation, but also in many other biomedical fields. The
relationship between intrinsically-disordered proteins and some human diseases
has played a significant role in disorder prediction in disease identification
and epidemiological investigations. Disordered proteins can also serve as
potential targets for drug discovery with an emphasis on the
disordered-to-ordered transition in the disordered binding regions, and this has 
led to substantial research in drug discovery or design based on protein
disordered region prediction. Furthermore, protein disorder prediction has also
been applied to healthcare by predicting the disease risk of mutations in
patients and studying the mechanistic basis of diseases. As the applications of
disorder prediction increase, so too does the need to make quick and accurate
predictions. To fill this need, we also present a new approach to predict protein
residue disorder using wide sequence windows that is applicable on the genomic
scale.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms160715384 
PMCID: PMC4519904
PMID: 26198229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0128334. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128334.
eCollection 2015.

DisoMCS: Accurately Predicting Protein Intrinsically Disordered Regions Using a
Multi-Class Conservative Score Approach.

Wang Z(1), Yang Q(1), Li T(1), Cong P(1).

The precise prediction of protein intrinsically disordered regions, which play a 
crucial role in biological procedures, is a necessary prerequisite to further the
understanding of the principles and mechanisms of protein function. Here, we
propose a novel predictor, DisoMCS, which is a more accurate predictor of protein
intrinsically disordered regions. The DisoMCS bases on an original multi-class
conservative score (MCS) obtained by sequence-order/disorder alignment.
Initially, near-disorder regions are defined on fragments located at both the
terminus of an ordered region connecting a disordered region. Then the
multi-class conservative score is generated by sequence alignment against a known
structure database and represented as order, near-disorder and disorder
conservative scores. The MCS of each amino acid has three elements: order,
near-disorder and disorder profiles. Finally, the MCS is exploited as features to
identify disordered regions in sequences. DisoMCS utilizes a non-redundant data
set as the training set, MCS and predicted secondary structure as features, and a
conditional random field as the classification algorithm. In predicted
near-disorder regions a residue is determined as an order or a disorder according
to the optimized decision threshold. DisoMCS was evaluated by cross-validation,
large-scale prediction, independent tests and CASP (Critical Assessment of
Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction) tests. All results confirmed that
DisoMCS was very competitive in terms of accuracy of prediction when compared
with well-established publicly available disordered region predictors. It also
indicated our approach was more accurate when a query has higher homologous with 
the knowledge database.AVAILABILITY: The DisoMCS is available at
http://cal.tongji.edu.cn/disorder/.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128334 
PMCID: PMC4474717
PMID: 26090958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell. 2015 May 21;161(5):1230-1230.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.024.

SnapShot: Intrinsic Structural Disorder.

Guharoy M(1), Pauwels K(1), Tompa P(2).

Many proteins (intrinsically disordered proteins, IDPs) or regions of proteins
(intrinsically disordered regions, IDRs) lack a well-defined 3D structure under
physiological conditions. Albeit unfolded and highly dynamic, these proteins are 
not denatured; rather, intrinsic structural disorder is their native, functional 
state.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.024 
PMID: 26000490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 May 13;16:153. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0592-2.

DisCons: a novel tool to quantify and classify evolutionary conservation of
intrinsic protein disorder.

Varadi M(1)(2), Guharoy M(3)(4), Zsolyomi F(5), Tompa P(6)(7)(8).

BACKGROUND: Analyzing the amino acid sequence of an intrinsically disordered
protein (IDP) in an evolutionary context can yield novel insights on the
functional role of disordered regions and sequence element(s). However, in the
case of many IDPs, the lack of evolutionary conservation of the primary sequence 
can hamper the study of functionality, because the conservation of their disorder
profile and ensuing function(s) may not appear in a traditional analysis of the
evolutionary history of the protein.
RESULTS: Here we present DisCons (Disorder Conservation), a novel pipelined tool 
that combines the quantification of sequence- and disorder conservation to
classify disordered residue positions. According to this scheme, the most
interesting categories (for functional purposes) are constrained disordered
residues and flexible disordered residues. The former residues show conservation 
of both the sequence and the property of disorder and are associated mainly with 
specific binding functionalities (e.g., short, linear motifs, SLiMs), whereas the
latter class correspond to segments where disorder as a feature is important for 
function as opposed to the identity of the underlying sequence (e.g., entropic
chains and linkers). DisCons therefore helps with elucidating the function(s)
arising from the disordered state by analyzing individual proteins as well as
large-scale proteomics datasets.
CONCLUSIONS: DisCons is an openly accessible sequence analysis tool that
identifies and highlights structurally disordered segments of proteins where the 
conformational flexibility is conserved across homologs, and therefore
potentially functional. The tool is freely available both as a web application
and as stand-alone source code hosted at http://pedb.vib.be/discons .

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-015-0592-2 
PMCID: PMC4427981
PMID: 25968230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2015 Apr 22;3(1):e1010999. doi:
10.1080/21690707.2015.1010999. eCollection 2015.

Unreported intrinsic disorder in proteins: Disorder emergency room.

Uversky VN(1).

This article continues an "Unreported Intrinsic Disorder in Proteins" series, the
goal of which is to expose some interesting cases of missed (or overlooked, or
ignored) disorder in proteins. The need for this series is justified by the
observation that despite the fact that protein intrinsic disorder is widely
accepted by the scientific community, there are still numerous instances when
appreciation of this phenomenon is absent. This results in the avalanche of
research papers which are talking about intrinsically disordered proteins (or
hybrid proteins with ordered and disordered regions) not recognizing that they
are talking about such proteins. Articles in the "Unreported Intrinsic Disorder
in Proteins" series provide a fast fix for some of the recent noticeable disorder
overlooks.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2015.1010999 
PMCID: PMC5314879
PMID: 28232885 


37. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2015 Mar 17;3(1):e1027032. doi:
10.1080/21690707.2015.1027032. eCollection 2015.

The intrinsic disorder alphabet. III. Dual personality of serine.

Uversky VN(1).

Proteins are natural polypeptides consisting of 20 major amino acid residues,
content and order of which in a given amino acid sequence defines the ability of 
a related protein to fold into unique functional state or to stay intrinsically
disordered. Amino acid sequences code for both foldable (ordered)
proteins/domains and for intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and IDP regions
(IDPRs), but these sequence codes are dramatically different. This difference
starts with a very general property of the corresponding amino acid sequences,
namely, their compositions. IDPs/IDPRs are enriched in specific
disorder-promoting residues, whereas amino acid sequences of ordered
proteins/domains typically contain more order-promoting residues. Therefore, the 
relative abundances of various amino acids in ordered and disordered proteins can
be used to scale amino acids according to their disorder promoting potentials.
This review continues a series of publications on the roles of different amino
acids in defining the phenomenon of protein intrinsic disorder and represents
serine, which is the third most disorder-promoting residue. Similar to previous
publications, this review represents some physico-chemical properties of serine
and the roles of this residue in structures and functions of ordered proteins,
describes major posttranslational modifications tailored to serine, and finally
gives an overview of roles of serine in structure and functions of intrinsically 
disordered proteins.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2015.1027032 
PMCID: PMC5314895
PMID: 28232888 


38. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2015 Mar 9;3(1):e984569. doi:
10.4161/21690707.2014.984569. eCollection 2015.

Digested disorder, Quarterly intrinsic disorder digest
(October-November-December, 2013).

DeForte S(1), Reddy KD(1), Uversky VN(2).

This is the 4th issue of the Digested Disorder series that represents reader's
digest of the scientific literature on intrinsically disordered proteins. The
only 2 criteria for inclusion in this digest are the publication date (a paper
should be published within the covered time frame) and topic (a paper should be
dedicated to any aspect of protein intrinsic disorder). The current digest issue 
covers papers published during the fourth quarter of 2013; i.e. during the period
of October, November, and December of 2013. Similar to previous issues, the
papers are grouped hierarchically by topics they cover, and for each of the
included paper a short description is given on its major findings.

DOI: 10.4161/21690707.2014.984569 
PMCID: PMC5336282
PMID: 28293487 


39. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2015 Mar 2;3(1):e984570. doi:
10.4161/21690707.2014.984570. eCollection 2015.

Can proteins be intrinsically disordered inside a membrane?

Kjaergaard M(1).

Intrinsically disorder has evolved in many soluble proteins because it confers a 
unique set of functional advantages. In contrast, the functions of membrane
proteins are largely understood in terms of well-defined structures. This raises 
the question: Why would the evolutionary pressures that select for disorder leave
membrane proteins untouched. In this hypothesis piece, I argue that intrinsic
disorder may exist in membrane embedded proteins, but that it will take a
different form due to the different environment. Disordered membrane proteins are
thus likely to have fully formed secondary structure, but little tertiary
structure. Furthermore, the sequence signature for disorder in membrane proteins 
is likely to be reversed; so disordered proteins are more hydrophobic than their 
folded counterparts. At present it is impossible to tell how common this type of 
disordered membrane protein is.

DOI: 10.4161/21690707.2014.984570 
PMCID: PMC5314916
PMID: 28232884 


40. J Mol Biol. 2015 Feb 27;427(4):982-996. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.12.007. Epub 2014
Dec 20.

The s2D method: simultaneous sequence-based prediction of the statistical
populations of ordered and disordered regions in proteins.

Sormanni P(1), Camilloni C(1), Fariselli P(2), Vendruscolo M(3).

Extensive amounts of information about protein sequences are becoming available, 
as demonstrated by the over 79 million entries in the UniProt database. Yet, it
is still challenging to obtain proteome-wide experimental information on the
structural properties associated with these sequences. Fast computational
predictors of secondary structure and of intrinsic disorder of proteins have been
developed in order to bridge this gap. These two types of predictions, however,
have remained largely separated, often preventing a clear characterization of the
structure and dynamics of proteins. Here, we introduce a computational method to 
predict secondary-structure populations from amino acid sequences, which
simultaneously characterizes structure and disorder in a unified statistical
mechanics framework. To develop this method, called s2D, we exploited recent
advances made in the analysis of NMR chemical shifts that provide quantitative
information about the probability distributions of secondary-structure elements
in disordered states. The results that we discuss show that the s2D method
predicts secondary-structure populations with an average error of about 14%. A
validation on three datasets of mostly disordered, mostly structured and partly
structured proteins, respectively, shows that its performance is comparable to or
better than that of existing predictors of intrinsic disorder and of secondary
structure. These results indicate that it is possible to perform rapid and
quantitative sequence-based characterizations of the structure and dynamics of
proteins through the predictions of the statistical distributions of their
ordered and disordered regions.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.12.007 
PMID: 25534081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2014 Dec 12;2(1):e970499. doi:
10.4161/21690693.2014.970499. eCollection 2014.

Unreported intrinsic disorder in proteins: Building connections to the literature
on IDPs.

Uversky VN(1).

This review opens a new series entitled "Unreported intrinsic disorder in
proteins." The goal of this series is to bring attention of researchers to an
interesting phenomenon of missed (or overlooked, or ignored, or unreported)
disorder. This series serves as a companion to "Digested Disorder" which provides
a quarterly review of papers on intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) found by
standard literature searches. The need for this alternative series results from
the observation that there are numerous publications that describe IDPs (or
hybrid proteins with ordered and disordered regions) yet fail to recognize many
of the key discoveries and publications in the IDP field. By ignoring the body of
work on IDPs, such publications often fail to relate their findings to prior
discoveries or fail to explore the obvious implications of their work. Thus, the 
goal of this series is not only to review these very interesting and important
papers, but also to point out how each paper relates to the IDP field and show
how common tools in the IDP field can readily take the findings in new directions
or provide a broader context for the reported findings.

DOI: 10.4161/21690693.2014.970499 
PMCID: PMC5314882
PMID: 28232880 


42. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2014 May 19;2(1):e27833. doi: 10.4161/idp.27833.
eCollection 2014.

Digested disorder: Quarterly intrinsic disorder digest (July-August-September,
2013).

Reddy KD(1), DeForte S(1), Uversky VN(2).

The current literature on intrinsically disordered proteins grows fast. To keep
interested readers up to speed with this literature, we continue a "Digested
Disorder" project and represent a new issue of reader's digest of the research
papers and reviews on intrinsically disordered proteins. The only 2 criteria for 
inclusion in this digest are the publication date (a paper should be published
within the covered time frame) and topic (a paper should be dedicated to any
aspect of protein intrinsic disorder). The current digest issue covers papers
published during the third quarter of 2013; i.e., during the period of June,
July, and September of 2013. Similar to previous issues, the papers are grouped
hierarchically by topics they cover, and for each of the included paper a short
description is given on its major findings.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.27833 
PMCID: PMC5314876
PMID: 28232877 


43. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Apr;71(8):1477-504. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1446-6. Epub 
2013 Aug 13.

A creature with a hundred waggly tails: intrinsically disordered proteins in the 
ribosome.

Peng Z(1), Oldfield CJ, Xue B, Mizianty MJ, Dunker AK, Kurgan L, Uversky VN.

Intrinsic disorder (i.e., lack of a unique 3-D structure) is a common phenomenon,
and many biologically active proteins are disordered as a whole, or contain long 
disordered regions. These intrinsically disordered proteins/regions constitute a 
significant part of all proteomes, and their functional repertoire is
complementary to functions of ordered proteins. In fact, intrinsic disorder
represents an important driving force for many specific functions. An
illustrative example of such disorder-centric functional class is RNA-binding
proteins. In this study, we present the results of comprehensive bioinformatics
analyses of the abundance and roles of intrinsic disorder in 3,411 ribosomal
proteins from 32 species. We show that many ribosomal proteins are intrinsically 
disordered or hybrid proteins that contain ordered and disordered domains.
Predicted globular domains of many ribosomal proteins contain noticeable regions 
of intrinsic disorder. We also show that disorder in ribosomal proteins has
different characteristics compared to other proteins that interact with RNA and
DNA including overall abundance, evolutionary conservation, and involvement in
protein-protein interactions. Furthermore, intrinsic disorder is not only
abundant in the ribosomal proteins, but we demonstrate that it is absolutely
necessary for their various functions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-013-1446-6 
PMID: 23942625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Immunol Methods. 2014 Apr;406:83-103. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2014.02.012. Epub 2014
Mar 12.

Epitope distribution in ordered and disordered protein regions - part A. T-cell
epitope frequency, affinity and hydropathy.

MitiÄ NS(1), PavloviÄ MD(2), JandrliÄ DR(3).

Highly disordered protein regions are prevalently hydrophilic, extremely
sensitive to proteolysis in vitro, and are expected to be under-represented as
T-cell epitopes. The aim of this research was to find out whether disorder and
hydropathy prediction methods could help in understanding epitope processing and 
presentation. According to the pan-specific T-cell epitope predictors NetMHCpan
and NetMHCIIpan and 9 publicly available disorder predictors, frequency of
epitopes presented by human leukocyte antigens (HLA) class-I or -II was found to 
be more than 2.5 times higher in ordered than in disordered protein regions
(depending on the disorder predictor). Both HLA class-I and HLA class-II binding 
epitopes are prevalently hydrophilic in disordered and prevalently hydrophobic in
ordered protein regions, whereas epitopes recognized by HLA class-II alleles are 
more hydrophobic than those recognized by HLA class-I. As regards both classes of
HLA molecules, high-affinity binding epitopes display more hydrophobicity than
low affinity-binding epitopes (in both ordered and disordered regions). Epitopes 
belonging to disordered protein regions were not predicted to have poor affinity 
to HLA class-II molecules, as expected from disorder intrinsic proteolytic
instability. The relation of epitope hydrophobicity and order/disorder location
was also valid if alleles were grouped according to the HLA class-I and HLA
class-II supertypes, except for the class-I supertype A3 in which the main part
of recognized epitopes was prevalently hydrophilic. Regarding specific
supertypes, the affinity of epitopes belonging to ordered regions varies only
slightly (depending on the disorder predictor) compared to the affinity of
epitopes in corresponding disordered regions. The distribution of epitopes in
ordered and disordered protein regions has revealed that the curves of
order-epitope distribution were convex-like while the curves of disorder-epitope 
distribution were concave-like. The percentage of prevalently hydrophobic
epitopes increases with the enhancement of epitope promiscuity level and moving
from disordered to ordered regions. These data suggests that reverse vaccinology,
oriented towards promiscuous and high-affinity epitopes, is also oriented towards
prevalently hydrophobic, ordered regions. The analysis of predicted and
experimentally evaluated epitopes of cancer-testis antigen MAGE-A3 has confirmed 
that the majority of T-cell epitopes, particularly those that are promiscuous or 
naturally processed, was located in ordered and disorder/order boundary protein
regions overlapping hydrophobic regions.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2014.02.012 
PMID: 24614036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1137:147-62. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-0366-5_11.

Prediction of intrinsic disorder in proteins using MFDp2.

Mizianty MJ(1), Uversky V, Kurgan L.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are either entirely disordered or
contain disordered regions in their native state. IDPs were found to be abundant 
across all kingdoms of life, particularly in eukaryotes, and are implicated in
numerous cellular processes. Experimental annotation of disorder lags behind the 
rapidly growing sizes of the protein databases and thus computational methods are
used to close this gap and to investigate the disorder. MFDp2 is a novel
webserver for accurate sequence-based prediction of protein disorder which also
outputs well-described sequence-derived information that allows profiling the
predicted disorder. We conveniently visualize sequence conservation, predicted
secondary structure, relative solvent accessibility, and alignments to chains
with annotated disorder. The webserver allows predictions for multiple proteins
at the same time, includes help pages and tutorial, and the results can be
downloaded as text-based (parsable) file. MFDp2 is freely available at
http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/MFDp2/.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-0366-5_11 
PMID: 24573480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1137:131-45. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-0366-5_10.

POODLE: tools predicting intrinsically disordered regions of amino acid sequence.

Shimizu K(1).

Protein intrinsic disorder, a widespread phenomenon characterized by a lack of
stable three-dimensional structure, is thought to play an important role in
protein function. In the last decade, dozens of computational methods for
predicting intrinsic disorder from amino acid sequences have been developed. They
are widely used by structural biologists not only for analyzing the biological
function of intrinsic disorder but also for finding flexible regions that
possibly hinder successful crystallization of the full-length protein. In this
chapter, I introduce Prediction Of Order and Disorder by machine LEarning
(POODLE), which is a series of programs accurately predicting intrinsic disorder.
After giving the theoretical background for predicting intrinsic disorder, I give
a detailed guide to using POODLE. I then also briefly introduce a case study
where using POODLE for functional analyses of protein disorder led to a novel
biological findings.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-0366-5_10 
PMID: 24573479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Proteins. 2014 Jan;82(1):145-58. doi: 10.1002/prot.24348. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Genome-scale prediction of proteins with long intrinsically disordered regions.

Peng Z(1), Mizianty MJ, Kurgan L.

Proteins with long disordered regions (LDRs), defined as having 30 or more
consecutive disordered residues, are abundant in eukaryotes, and these regions
are recognized as a distinct class of biologically functional domains. LDRs
facilitate various cellular functions and are important for target selection in
structural genomics. Motivated by the lack of methods that directly predict
proteins with LDRs, we designed Super-fast predictor of proteins with Long
Intrinsically DisordERed regions (SLIDER). SLIDER utilizes logistic regression
that takes an empirically chosen set of numerical features, which consider
selected physicochemical properties of amino acids, sequence complexity, and
amino acid composition, as its inputs. Empirical tests show that SLIDER offers
competitive predictive performance combined with low computational cost. It
outperforms, by at least a modest margin, a comprehensive set of modern disorder 
predictors (that can indirectly predict LDRs) and is 16 times faster compared to 
the best currently available disorder predictor. Utilizing our time-efficient
predictor, we characterized abundance and functional roles of proteins with LDRs 
over 110 eukaryotic proteomes. Similar to related studies, we found that
eukaryotes have many (on average 30.3%) proteins with LDRs with majority of
proteomes having between 25 and 40%, where higher abundance is characteristic to 
proteomes that have larger proteins. Our first-of-its-kind large-scale functional
analysis shows that these proteins are enriched in a number of cellular functions
and processes including certain binding events, regulation of catalytic
activities, cellular component organization, biogenesis, biological regulation,
and some metabolic and developmental processes. A webserver that implements
SLIDER is available at http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/SLIDER/.

Copyright Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.24348 
PMID: 23798504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 Dec;30(12):2645-53. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst157. Epub 2013 Sep
12.

Protein expansion is primarily due to indels in intrinsically disordered regions.

Light S(1), Sagit R, Sachenkova O, Ekman D, Elofsson A.

Proteins evolve not only through point mutations but also by insertion and
deletion events, which affect the length of the protein. It is well known that
such indel events most frequently occur in surface-exposed loops. However,
detailed analysis of indel events in distantly related and fast-evolving proteins
is hampered by the difficulty involved in correctly aligning such sequences.
Here, we circumvent this problem by first only analyzing homologous proteins
based on length variation rather than pairwise alignments. Using this approach,
we find a surprisingly strong relationship between difference in length and
difference in the number of intrinsically disordered residues, where up to three 
quarters of the length variation can be explained by changes in the number of
intrinsically disordered residues. Further, we find that disorder is common in
both insertions and deletions. A more detailed analysis reveals that indel events
do not induce disorder but rather that already disordered regions accrue indels, 
suggesting that there is a lowered selective pressure for indels to occur within 
intrinsically disordered regions.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst157 
PMID: 24037790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Nov 7;1(1):e26782. doi: 10.4161/idp.26782.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

Disorder in the lifetime of a protein.

Uversky VN(1)(2).

Intrinsic disorder is everywhere and is inevitable. The non-folding propensity is
inherent for numerous natural polypeptide chains, and many functional proteins
and protein regions are intrinsically disordered. Furthermore, at particular
moments in their life, most notably during their synthesis and degradation, all
ordered proteins are at least partially unfolded (disordered). Also, there is a
widely spread phenomenon of conditional (functional or transient) disorder, where
functions of many ordered proteins require local or even global unfolding of
their unique structures. Finally, extrinsic disorder (i.e., intrinsic disorder in
functional partners of ordered proteins) should be taken into account too.
Therefore, even if a protein is completely devoid of intrinsically disordered
regions in its mature form (which is a rather exceptional situation), it faces
different forms of disorder (intrinsic, extrinsic, or induced disorder) at all
the stages of its functional life, from birth to death. The goal of this article 
is to briefly introduce this concept of disorder in the lifetime of a protein.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.26782 
PMCID: PMC5424783
PMID: 28516024 


50. F1000Res. 2013 Sep 17;2:190. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.2-190.v1. eCollection
2013.

On the intrinsic disorder status of the major players in programmed cell death
pathways.

Uversky AV(1), Xue B(2), Peng Z(3), Kurgan L(3), Uversky VN(4).

Earlier computational and bioinformatics analysis of several large protein
datasets across 28 species showed that proteins involved in regulation and
execution of programmed cell death (PCD) possess substantial amounts of intrinsic
disorder. Based on the comprehensive analysis of these datasets by a wide array
of modern bioinformatics tools it was concluded that disordered regions of
PCD-related proteins are involved in a multitude of biological functions and
interactions with various partners, possess numerous posttranslational
modification sites, and have specific evolutionary patterns (Peng et al. 2013).
This study extends our previous work by providing information on the intrinsic
disorder status of some of the major players of the three major PCD pathways:
apoptosis, autophagy, and necroptosis. We also present a detailed description of 
the disorder status and interactomes of selected proteins that are involved in
the p53-mediated apoptotic signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.2-190.v1 
PMCID: PMC3829196
PMID: 24358900 


51. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2013 Jun;23(3):467-72. doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2013.02.001.
Epub 2013 Mar 1.

The contribution of intrinsic disorder prediction to the elucidation of protein
function.

Cozzetto D(1), Jones DT.

Current knowledge of protein function stems primarily from the detailed
characterization of some protein domain families and from extensive
homology-based annotation transfers. Intrinsically disordered proteins exploit
complementary molecular recognition mechanisms and their study has potential to
make a significant contribution to the field. Building on established
computational biology techniques, efforts are now aimed at unveiling their
biological roles at the molecular and system level. Recent developments towards
identifying functional sites in disordered regions, and analysing how the
occurrence of protein disorder in a gene can provide insight into its biochemical
and cellular function are discussed.

Copyright Â© 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.2013.02.001 
PMID: 23466039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Apr 1;1(1):e25724. doi: 10.4161/idp.25724.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

Distribution and cluster analysis of predicted intrinsically disordered protein
Pfam domains.

Williams RW(1), Xue B(2)(3), Uversky VN(2)(3)(4)(5), Dunker AK(2).

The Pfam database groups regions of proteins by how well hidden Markov models
(HMMs) can be trained to recognize similarities among them. Conservation pressure
is probably in play here. The Pfam seed training set includes sequence and
structure information, being drawn largely from the PDB. A long standing
hypothesis among intrinsically disordered protein (IDP) investigators has held
that conservation pressures are also at play in the evolution of different kinds 
of intrinsic disorder, but we find that predicted intrinsic disorder (PID) is not
always conserved across Pfam domains. Here we analyze distributions and clusters 
of PID regions in 193024 members of the version 23.0 Pfam seed database. To
include the maximum information available for proteins that remain unfolded in
solution, we employ the 10 linearly independent Kidera factors1-3 for the amino
acids, combined with PONDR4 predictions of disorder tendency, to transform the
sequences of these Pfam members into an 11 column matrix where the number of rows
is the length of each Pfam region. Cluster analyses of the set of all regions,
including those that are folded, show 6 groupings of domains. Cluster analyses of
domains with mean VSL2b scores greater than 0.5 (half predicted disorder or more)
show at least 3 separated groups. It is hypothesized that grouping sets into
shorter sequences with more uniform length will reveal more information about
intrinsic disorder and lead to more finely structured and perhaps more accurate
predictions. HMMs could be trained to include this information.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.25724 
PMCID: PMC5424788
PMID: 28516017 


53. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Apr 1;1(1):e25496. doi: 10.4161/idp.25496.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

Digested disorder: Quarterly intrinsic disorder digest (January/February/March,
2013).

Uversky VN(1)(2).

The current literature on intrinsically disordered proteins is blooming. A simple
PubMed search for "intrinsically disordered protein OR natively unfolded protein"
returns about 1,800 hits (as of June 17, 2013), with many papers published quite 
recently. To keep interested readers up to speed with this literature, we are
starting a "Digested Disorder" project, which will encompass a series of reader's
digest type of publications aiming at the objective representation of the
research papers and reviews on intrinsically disordered proteins. The only two
criteria for inclusion in this digest are the publication date (a paper should be
published within the covered time frame) and topic (a paper should be dedicated
to any aspect of protein intrinsic disorder). The current digest covers papers
published during the period of January, February and March of 2013. The papers
are grouped hierarchically by topics they cover, and for each of the included
paper a short description is given on its major findings.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.25496 
PMCID: PMC5424799
PMID: 28516015 


54. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Apr 1;1(1):e24848. doi: 10.4161/idp.24848.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

Functional fragments of disorder in outer membrane Î² barrel proteins.

Kurup K(1), Dunker AK(2), Krishnaswamy S(1).

The traditional view of "sequence-structure-function" has been amended by the
discovery of intrinsically disordered proteins. Almost 50% of PDB structures are 
now known to have one or more regions of disorder, which are involved in diverse 
functions. These regions typically possess low aromatic content and sequence
complexity as well as high net charge and flexibility. In this study, we examined
the composition and contribution of intrinsic disorder in outer membrane Î² barrel
protein functions. Our systematic analysis to find the dual personality (DP)
fragments, which often function by disorder-order transitions, revealed the
presence of 61 DP fragments with 234 residues in Î² barrel trans membrane protein 
structures. It was found that though the disorder is more prevalent in the
periplasmic regions, most of the residues which undergo disorder-order
transitions are found in the extracellular regions. For example, the calcium
binding sites in BtuB protein are found to undergo disorder to order transition
upon binding calcium. The conformational change in the cell receptor binding site
of the OpcA protein, which is important in host cell interactions of N.
meningitidis, was also found to be due to the disorder-order transitions
occurring in the presence of the ligand. The natively disordered nature of DP
fragments makes it more appropriate to call them "functional fragments of
disorder." The present study provides insight into the roles played by
intrinsically disordered regions in outer membrane protein functions.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.24848 
PMCID: PMC5424791
PMID: 28516011 


55. Protein Pept Lett. 2013 Mar;20(3):243-8.

A sequence-based approach for predicting protein disordered regions.

Huang T(1), He ZS, Cui WR, Cai YD, Shi XH, Hu LL, Chou KC.

Protein disordered regions are associated with some critical cellular functions
such as transcriptional regulation, translation and cellular signal transduction,
and they are responsible for various diseases. Although experimental methods have
been developed to determine these regions, they are time-consuming and expensive.
Therefore, it is highly desired to develop computational methods that can provide
us with this kind information in a rapid and inexpensive manner. Here we propose 
a sequence-based computational approach for predicting protein disordered regions
by means of the Nearest Neighbor algorithm, in which conservation, amino acid
factor and secondary structure status of each amino acid in a fixed-length
sliding window are taken as the encoding features. Also, the feature selection
based on mRMR (maximum Relevancy Minimum Redundancy) is applied to obtain an
optimal 51-feature set that includes 39 conservation features and 12 secondary
structure features. With the optimal 51 features, our predictor yielded quite
promising MCC (Mathew's correlation coefficients): 0.371 on a rigorous benchmark 
dataset tested by 5-fold cross-validation and 0.219 on an independent test
dataset. Our results suggest that conservation and secondary structure play
important roles in intrinsically disordered proteins.


PMID: 22591473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Feb;1834(2):487-98. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.12.003.
Epub 2012 Dec 8.

Utilization of protein intrinsic disorder knowledge in structural proteomics.

Oldfield CJ(1), Xue B, Van YY, Ulrich EL, Markley JL, Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and proteins with long disordered
regions are highly abundant in various proteomes. Despite their lack of
well-defined ordered structure, these proteins and regions are frequently
involved in crucial biological processes. Although in recent years these proteins
have attracted the attention of many researchers, IDPs represent a significant
challenge for structural characterization since these proteins can impact many of
the processes in the structure determination pipeline. Here we investigate the
effects of IDPs on the structure determination process and the utility of
disorder prediction in selecting and improving proteins for structural
characterization. Examination of the extent of intrinsic disorder in existing
crystal structures found that relatively few protein crystal structures contain
extensive regions of intrinsic disorder. Although intrinsic disorder is not the
only cause of crystallization failures and many structured proteins cannot be
crystallized, filtering out highly disordered proteins from
structure-determination target lists is still likely to be cost effective.
Therefore it is desirable to avoid highly disordered proteins from
structure-determination target lists and we show that disorder prediction can be 
applied effectively to enrich structure determination pipelines with proteins
more likely to yield crystal structures. For structural investigation of specific
proteins, disorder prediction can be used to improve targets for structure
determination. Finally, a framework for considering intrinsic disorder in the
structure determination pipeline is proposed.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.12.003 
PMCID: PMC3951342
PMID: 23232152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Jan 1;1(1):e27454. doi: 10.4161/idp.27454.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

Digested disorder: Quarterly intrinsic disorder digest (April-May-June, 2013).

DeForte S(1), Reddy KD(1), Uversky VN(1)(2)(3).

The current literature on intrinsically disordered proteins is overwhelming. To
keep interested readers up to speed with this literature, we continue a "Digested
Disorder" project and represent a series of reader's digest type articles
objectively representing the research papers and reviews on intrinsically
disordered proteins. The only 2 criteria for inclusion in this digest are the
publication date (a paper should be published within the covered time frame) and 
topic (a paper should be dedicated to any aspect of protein intrinsic disorder). 
The current digest issue covers papers published during the period of April, May,
and June of 2013. The papers are grouped hierarchically by topics they cover, and
for each of the included paper a short description is given on its major
findings.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.27454 
PMCID: PMC5424790
PMID: 28516028 


58. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jan;41(Database issue):D508-16. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1226.
Epub 2012 Nov 29.

DÂ²PÂ²: database of disordered protein predictions.

Oates ME(1), Romero P, Ishida T, Ghalwash M, Mizianty MJ, Xue B, DosztÃ¡nyi Z,
Uversky VN, Obradovic Z, Kurgan L, Dunker AK, Gough J.

We present the Database of Disordered Protein Prediction (D(2)P(2)), available at
http://d2p2.pro (including website source code). A battery of disorder predictors
and their variants, VL-XT, VSL2b, PrDOS, PV2, Espritz and IUPred, were run on all
protein sequences from 1765 complete proteomes (to be updated as more genomes are
completed). Integrated with these results are all of the predicted (mostly
structured) SCOP domains using the SUPERFAMILY predictor. These
disorder/structure annotations together enable comparison of the disorder
predictors with each other and examination of the overlap between disordered
predictions and SCOP domains on a large scale. D(2)P(2) will increase our
understanding of the interplay between disorder and structure, the genomic
distribution of disorder, and its evolutionary history. The parsed data are made 
available in a unified format for download as flat files or SQL tables either by 
genome, by predictor, or for the complete set. An interactive website provides a 
graphical view of each protein annotated with the SCOP domains and disordered
regions from all predictors overlaid (or shown as a consensus). There are
statistics and tools for browsing and comparing genomes and their disorder within
the context of their position on the tree of life.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks1226 
PMCID: PMC3531159
PMID: 23203878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Oct 30;8(12):3262-73. doi: 10.1039/c2mb25202c.

Chemical composition is maintained in poorly conserved intrinsically disordered
regions and suggests a means for their classification.

Moesa HA(1), Wakabayashi S, Nakai K, Patil A.

Intrinsically disordered regions in proteins are known to evolve rapidly while
maintaining their function. However, given their lack of structure and sequence
conservation, the means through which they stay functional is not clear. Poor
sequence conservation also hampers the classification of these regions into
functional groups. We studied the sequence conservation of a large number of
predicted and experimentally determined intrinsically disordered regions from the
human proteome in 7 other eukaryotes. We determined the chemical composition of
disordered regions by calculating the fraction of positive, negative, polar,
hydrophobic and special (Pro, Gly) residues, and studied its maintenance in
orthologous proteins. A significant number of disordered regions with low
sequence conservation showed considerable similarity in their chemical
composition between orthologs. Clustering disordered regions based on their
chemical composition resulted in functionally distinct groups. Finally,
disordered regions showed location preference within the proteins that was
dependent on their chemical composition. We conclude that preserving the overall 
chemical composition is one of the ways through which intrinsically disordered
regions maintain their flexibility and function through evolution. We propose
that the chemical composition of disordered regions can be used to classify them 
into functional groups and, together with conservation and location, may be used 
to define a general classification scheme.

DOI: 10.1039/c2mb25202c 
PMID: 23076520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Struct Biol. 2012 Oct;180(1):201-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2012.05.013. Epub 2012 
May 29.

High-throughput characterization of intrinsic disorder in proteins from the
Protein Structure Initiative.

Johnson DE(1), Xue B, Sickmeier MD, Meng J, Cortese MS, Oldfield CJ, Le Gall T,
Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

The identification of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) among the targets 
that fail to form satisfactory crystal structures in the Protein Structure
Initiative represents a key to reducing the costs and time for determining
three-dimensional structures of proteins. To help in this endeavor, several
Protein Structure Initiative Centers were asked to send samples of both
crystallizable proteins and proteins that failed to crystallize. The abundance of
intrinsic disorder in these proteins was evaluated via computational analysis
using predictors of natural disordered regions (PONDRÂ®) and the potential
cleavage sites and corresponding fragments were determined. Then, the target
proteins were analyzed for intrinsic disorder by their resistance to limited
proteolysis. The rates of tryptic digestion of sample target proteins were
compared to those of lysozyme/myoglobin, apomyoglobin, and Î±-casein as standards 
of ordered, partially disordered and completely disordered proteins,
respectively. At the next stage, the protein samples were subjected to both
far-UV and near-UV circular dichroism (CD) analysis. For most of the samples, a
good agreement between CD data, predictions of disorder and the rates of limited 
tryptic digestion was established. Further experimentation is being performed on 
a smaller subset of these samples in order to obtain more detailed information on
the ordered/disordered nature of the proteins.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2012.05.013 
PMCID: PMC3578346
PMID: 22651963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Jul 6;8(7):1886-901. doi: 10.1039/c2mb25102g. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

More than just tails: intrinsic disorder in histone proteins.

Peng Z(1), Mizianty MJ, Xue B, Kurgan L, Uversky VN.

Many biologically active proteins are disordered as a whole, or contain long
disordered regions. These intrinsically disordered proteins/regions are very
common in nature, abundantly found in all organisms, where they carry out
important biological functions. The functions of these proteins complement the
functional repertoire of "normal" ordered proteins, and many protein functional
classes are heavily dependent on intrinsic disorder. Among these disorder-centric
functions are interactions with nucleic acids and protein complex assembly. In
this study, we present the results of comprehensive bioinformatics analyses of
the abundance and roles of intrinsic disorder in 2007 histones from 746 species. 
We show that all the members of the histone family are intrinsically disordered
proteins. Furthermore, intrinsic disorder is not only abundant in histones, but
is absolutely necessary for various histone functions, starting from
heterodimerization to formation of higher order oligomers, to interactions with
DNA and other proteins, and to posttranslational modifications.

DOI: 10.1039/c2mb25102g 
PMID: 22543956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics. 2012 Jun;10(3):158-65. doi:
10.1016/j.gpb.2012.01.002. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Computational analysis of position-dependent disorder content in DisProt
database.

KovaÄeviÄ JJ(1).

A bioinformatics analysis of disorder content of proteins from the DisProt
database has been performed with respect to position of disordered residues. Each
protein chain was divided into three parts: N- and C- terminal parts with each
containing 30 amino acid (AA) residues and the middle region containing the
remaining AA residues. The results show that in terminal parts, the percentage of
disordered AA residues is higher than that of all AA residues (17% of disordered 
AA residues and 11% of all). We analyzed the percentage of disorder for each of
20 AA residues in the three parts of proteins with respect to their hydropathy
and molecular weight. For each AA, the percentage of disorder in the middle part 
is lower than that in terminal parts which is comparable at the two termini. A
new scale of AAs has been introduced according to their disorder content in the
middle part of proteins: CIFWMLYHRNVTAGQDSKEP. All big hydrophobic AAs are less
frequently disordered, while almost all small hydrophilic AAs are more frequently
disordered. The results obtained may be useful for construction and improving
predictors for protein disorder.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gpb.2012.01.002 
PMCID: PMC5056116
PMID: 22917189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Apr;69(8):1211-59. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0859-3. Epub
2011 Oct 28.

Protein intrinsic disorder as a flexible armor and a weapon of HIV-1.

Xue B(1), Mizianty MJ, Kurgan L, Uversky VN.

Many proteins and protein regions are disordered in their native, biologically
active states. These proteins/regions are abundant in different organisms and
carry out important biological functions that complement the functional
repertoire of ordered proteins. Viruses, with their highly compact genomes, small
proteomes, and high adaptability for fast change in their biological and physical
environment utilize many of the advantages of intrinsic disorder. In fact, viral 
proteins are generally rich in intrinsic disorder, and intrinsically disordered
regions are commonly used by viruses to invade the host organisms, to hijack
various host systems, and to help viruses in accommodation to their hostile
habitats and to manage their economic usage of genetic material. In this review, 
we focus on the structural peculiarities of HIV-1 proteins, on the abundance of
intrinsic disorder in viral proteins, and on the role of intrinsic disorder in
their functions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-011-0859-3 
PMID: 22033837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2012 Feb;13(1):6-18.

Comprehensive comparative assessment of in-silico predictors of disordered
regions.

Peng ZL(1), Kurgan L.

Intrinsic disorder is relatively common in proteins, plays important roles in
numerous cellular activities, and its prevalence was implicated in various human 
diseases. However, annotations of the disorder lag behind the rapidly increasing 
number of known protein chains. The last decade observed development of a
relatively large number of in-silico methods that predict the disorder using the 
protein sequence as their input. We perform a first-of-its kind comprehensive
empirical evaluation of the disorder predictors which is characterized by three
novel aspects, (1) we evaluate the quality of the disorder predictions at the
residue, segment, and chain levels; (2) we consider a large number of published
and accessible to the end user predictors that are evaluated on a relatively big 
dataset with close to 500 proteins; and (3) we assess statistical significance of
differences between the considered methods. Our study reveals that there is no
universally superior predictor and that the top-performing methods are
complementary. We show that while recent consensus-based predictors outperform
other considered methods for the residue-level predictions, some older methods
perform better for the prediction of the disordered segments. Our analysis
indicates that certain predictors are biased to under-predict the disorder, while
some other solutions tend to over-predict the number of the disordered residues. 
We also evaluate the utility of the predicted residue-level disorder for
prediction of proteins with long disordered segments and prediction of the
chainlevel disorder content. Lastly, we provide recommendations concerning
development of a new generation of consensusbased methods and specialized methods
for improved prediction of the disorder content.

Â© 2012 Bentham Science Publishers


PMID: 22044149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2012 Feb;13(1):19-33.

Disordered proteins and network disorder in network descriptions of protein
structure, dynamics and function: hypotheses and a comprehensive review.

Csermely P(1), Sandhu KS, Hazai E, Hoksza Z, Kiss HJ, Miozzo F, Veres DV, Piazza 
F, Nussinov R.

During the last decade, network approaches became a powerful tool to describe
protein structure and dynamics. Here we review the links between disordered
proteins and the associated networks, and describe the consequences of local,
mesoscopic and global network disorder on changes in protein structure and
dynamics. We introduce a new classification of protein networks into
'cumulus-type', i.e., those similar to puffy (white) clouds, and 'stratus-type', 
i.e., those similar to flat, dense (dark) low-lying clouds, and relate these
network types to protein disorder dynamics and to differences in energy
transmission processes. In the first class, there is limited overlap between the 
modules, which implies higher rigidity of the individual units; there the
conformational changes can be described by an 'energy transfer' mechanism. In the
second class, the topology presents a compact structure with significant overlap 
between the modules; there the conformational changes can be described by
'multi-trajectories'; that is, multiple highly populated pathways. We further
propose that disordered protein regions evolved to help other protein segments
reach 'rarely visited' but functionally-related states. We also show the role of 
disorder in 'spatial games' of amino acids; highlight the effects of
intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) on cellular networks and list some
possible studies linking protein disorder and protein structure networks.

Â© 2012 Bentham Science Publishers


PMID: 22044146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Jan;8(1):27-32. doi: 10.1039/c1mb05251a. Epub 2011 Nov 14.

Disease mutations in disordered regions--exception to the rule?

Vacic V(1), Iakoucheva LM.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) have been implicated in a number of
human diseases, including cancer, diabetes, neurodegenerative and cardiovascular 
disorders. Although for some of these conditions molecular mechanisms are now
better understood, the big picture connecting distinct structural properties and 
functional repertoire of IDPs to pathogenesis and disease progression is still
incomplete. Recent studies suggest that signaling and regulatory roles carried
out by IDPs require them to be tightly regulated, and that altered IDP abundance 
may lead to disease. Here, we propose another link between IDPs and disease that 
takes into account disease-associated missense mutations located in the
intrinsically disordered regions. We argue that such mutations are more prevalent
and have larger functional impact than previously thought. In addition, we
demonstrate that deleterious amino acid substitutions that cause
disorder-to-order transitions are particularly enriched among disease mutations
compared to neutral polymorphisms. Finally, we discuss potential differences in
functional outcomes between disease mutations in ordered and disordered regions, 
and challenge the conventional structure-centric view of missense mutations.

DOI: 10.1039/c1mb05251a 
PMCID: PMC3307532
PMID: 22080206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Jan;8(1):320-6. doi: 10.1039/c1mb05274h. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Intrinsic protein disorder in human pathways.

Fong JH(1), Shoemaker BA, Panchenko AR.

We analyze human-specific KEGG pathways trying to understand the functional role 
of intrinsic disorder in proteins. Pathways provide a comprehensive picture of
biological processes and allow better understanding of a protein's function
within the specific context of its surroundings. Our study pinpoints a few
specific pathways significantly enriched in disorder-containing proteins and
identifies the role of these proteins within the framework of pathway
relationships. Three major categories of relations are shown to be significantly 
enriched in disordered proteins: gene expression, protein binding and to a lesser
degree, protein phosphorylation. Finally we find that relations involving protein
activation and to some extent inhibition are characterized by low disorder
content.

DOI: 10.1039/c1mb05274h 
PMCID: PMC3584708
PMID: 22012032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2012:140-51.

Coevolved residues and the functional association for intrinsically disordered
proteins.

Jeong CS(1), Kim D.

The evolution of intrinsically disordered proteins has been studied primarily by 
focusing on evolutionary changes at an individual position such as substitution
and conservation, but the evolutionary association between disordered residues
has not been comprehensively investigated. Here, we analyze the distribution of
residue-residue coevolution for disordered proteins. We reveal that the degree of
coevolved residues significantly decreases in disordered regions regardless of
the sequence propensity, and the degree distribution of coevolved and conserved
residues exclusively differs in each functional category. Consequently, the
coevolution information can be useful for predicting intrinsic disorder and
understanding biological functions of a disordered region from the sequence.


PMID: 22174270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2012:128-39.

Subclassifying disordered proteins by the CH-CDF plot method.

Huang F(1), Oldfield C, Meng J, Hsu WL, Xue B, Uversky VN, Romero P, Dunker AK.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are associated with a wide range of
functions. We suggest that sequence-based subtypes, which we call flavors, may
provide the basis for different biological functions. The problem is to find a
method that separates IDPs into different flavor / function groups. Here we
discuss one approach, the (Charge-Hydropathy) versus (Cumulative Distribution
Function) plot or CH-CDF plot, which is based the combined use of the CH and CDF 
disorder predictors. These two predictors are based on significantly different
inputs and methods. This CH-CDF plot partitions all proteins into 4 groups:
structured, mixed, disordered, and rare. Studies of the Protein Data Bank (PDB)
entries and homologous show different structural biases for each group classified
by the CH-CDF plot. The mixed class has more order-promoting residues and more
ordered regions than the disordered class. To test whether this partition
accomplishes any functional separation, we performed gene ontology (GO) term
analysis on each class. Some functions are indeed found to be related to subtypes
of disorder: the disordered class is highly active in mitosis-related processes
among others. Meanwhile, the mixed class is highly associated with signaling
pathways, where having both ordered and disordered regions could possibly be
important.


PMID: 22174269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2012:116-27.

Intrinsic protein disorder and protein-protein interactions.

Hsu WL(1), Oldfield C, Meng J, Huang F, Xue B, Uversky VN, Romero P, Dunker AK.

Intrinsically disordered proteins often bind to more than one partner. In this
study, we focused on 11 sets of complexes in which the same disordered segment
becomes bound to two or more distinct partners. For this collection of protein
complexes, two or more partners of each disordered segment were selected to have 
less than 25% amino acid identity at structurally aligned positions. As it turned
out that most of the examples so selected had similar 3D structure, the studied
set was reduced to just these similar-fold cases. Based on the analyses of the
interacting partners, the average sequence identity of the partners' binding
regions showed substantially higher conservation as compared to the nonbinding
regions: The residue identities, averaged over the 11 sets of partner proteins,
were as follows: binding residues, 42 Â± 6%; nonbinding residues 20 Â± 3%;
nonbinding buried residues 26 Â± 5%; and nonbinding surface residues 16 Â± 3%. The 
higher sequence identity of the binding residues compared to the other sets of
residues provides evidence that these observed interactions are likely to be
meaningful biological interactions, not artifacts. Since many of the features of 
the various interactions indicate that the disordered binding segments were
likely to have been disordered before binding, these results also add further
weight to the existence and function of intrinsically disordered regions inside
cells.


PMID: 22174268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2012:94-103.

Correlation between posttranslational modification and intrinsic disorder in
protein.

Gao J(1), Xu D.

Protein intrinsic disorder has been shown to play an important role in some
posttranslational modifications (PTM). In this paper, we systematically
investigated the correlation between protein disorder and dozens of PTMs using
data from UniProt/Swiss-Prot and 3-D structures solved by NMR from Protein Data
Bank. We observed that many PTMs have a preference for occurrence in disordered
regions, including phospho-serine/-threonine/-tyrosine, hydroxylation,
sulfotyrosine, S-geranylgeranyl cysteine, deamidated glutamine,
4-carboxyglutamate, 6'-bromotryptophan and most of methylation; while a few PTMs 
have a preference for occurrence in ordered regions, including
4-aspartylphosphate, S-nitrosocysteine, tele-methylhistidine, FMN conjugation,
4,5-dihydroxylysine, 3- methylthioaspartic acid, most of ADP-ribosylation, and
most of FAD attachment. It is also noted that acetyllysine does not show any
significant preference for occurrence in either disordered or ordered regions.
Further analysis of NMR structures suggested disorder-toorder transitions might
be introduced by modifications of phospho-serine/-threonine
mono-/di-/tri-methyllysine, sulfotyrosine, 4-carboxyglutamate, and potentially
4-hydroxyproline. This study sheds light on the functions and mechanisms of
various PTMs.


PMCID: PMC5120255
PMID: 22174266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(10):e1002709. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002709. Epub
2012 Oct 4.

Disease-associated mutations disrupt functionally important regions of intrinsic 
protein disorder.

Vacic V(1), Markwick PR, Oldfield CJ, Zhao X, Haynes C, Uversky VN, Iakoucheva
LM.

The effects of disease mutations on protein structure and function have been
extensively investigated, and many predictors of the functional impact of single 
amino acid substitutions are publicly available. The majority of these predictors
are based on protein structure and evolutionary conservation, following the
assumption that disease mutations predominantly affect folded and conserved
protein regions. However, the prevalence of the intrinsically disordered proteins
(IDPs) and regions (IDRs) in the human proteome together with their lack of fixed
structure and low sequence conservation raise a question about the impact of
disease mutations in IDRs. Here, we investigate annotated missense disease
mutations and show that 21.7% of them are located within such intrinsically
disordered regions. We further demonstrate that 20% of disease mutations in IDRs 
cause local disorder-to-order transitions, which represents a 1.7-2.7 fold
increase compared to annotated polymorphisms and neutral evolutionary
substitutions, respectively. Secondary structure predictions show elevated rates 
of transition from helices and strands into loops and vice versa in the disease
mutations dataset. Disease disorder-to-order mutations also influence predicted
molecular recognition features (MoRFs) more often than the control mutations. The
repertoire of disorder-to-order transition mutations is limited, with five most
frequent mutations (RâW, RâC, EâK, RâH, RâQ) collectively accounting for 44% of
all deleterious disorder-to-order transitions. As a proof of concept, we
performed accelerated molecular dynamics simulations on a deleterious
disorder-to-order transition mutation of tumor protein p63 and, in agreement with
our predictions, observed an increased Î±-helical propensity of the region
harboring the mutation. Our findings highlight the importance of mutations in
IDRs and refine the traditional structure-centric view of disease mutations. The 
results of this study offer a new perspective on the role of mutations in
disease, with implications for improving predictors of the functional impact of
missense mutations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002709 
PMCID: PMC3464192
PMID: 23055912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Biosyst. 2011 Dec;7(12):3353-65. doi: 10.1039/c1mb05316g. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

Intrinsic disorder of the extracellular matrix.

Peysselon F(1), Xue B, Uversky VN, Ricard-Blum S.

The extracellular matrix is very well organized at the supramolecular and tissue 
levels and little is known on the potential role of intrinsic disorder in
promoting its organization. We predicted the amount of disorder and identified
disordered regions in the human extracellular proteome with established
computational tools. The extracellular proteome is significantly enriched in
proteins comprising more than 50% of disorder compared to the complete human
proteome. The enrichment is mostly due to long disordered regions containing at
least 100 consecutive disordered residues. The amount of intrinsic disorder is
heterogeneous in the extracellular protein families, with the most disordered
being collagens and the small integrin-binding ligand N-linked glycoproteins.
Although most domains found in extracellular proteins are structured, the
fibronectin III domains contain a variable amount of disordered residues (up to
92%). Binding sites for heparin and integrins are found in disordered sequences
of extracellular proteins. Intrinsic disorder is evenly distributed in hubs and
ends in the interaction network of extracellular proteins with their
extracellular partners. In contrast, extracellular hubs are significantly
enriched in disorder in the network of extracellular proteins with their
extracellular, membrane and intracellular partners. Disorder could thus provide
the structural plasticity required for the hubs to interact with membrane and
intracellular proteins. Organization and assembly of the extracellular matrix,
development of mineralized tissues and cell-matrix adhesion are the biological
processes overrepresented in the most disordered extracellular proteins.
Extracellular disorder is associated with binding to growth factors,
glycosaminoglycans and integrins at the molecular level.

DOI: 10.1039/c1mb05316g 
PMID: 22009114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Q Rev Biophys. 2011 Nov;44(4):467-518. doi: 10.1017/S0033583511000060. Epub 2011 
Jul 1.

Expanding the proteome: disordered and alternatively folded proteins.

Dyson HJ(1).

Proteins provide much of the scaffolding for life, as well as undertaking a
variety of essential catalytic reactions. These characteristic functions have led
us to presuppose that proteins are in general functional only when well
structured and correctly folded. As we begin to explore the repertoire of
possible protein sequences inherent in the human and other genomes, two stark
facts that belie this supposition become clear: firstly, the number of apparent
open reading frames in the human genome is significantly smaller than appears to 
be necessary to code for all of the diverse proteins in higher organisms, and
secondly that a significant proportion of the protein sequences that would be
coded by the genome would not be expected to form stable three-dimensional (3D)
structures. Clearly the genome must include coding for a multitude of alternative
forms of proteins, some of which may be partly or fully disordered or
incompletely structured in their functional states. At the same time as this
likelihood was recognized, experimental studies also began to uncover examples of
important protein molecules and domains that were incompletely structured or
completely disordered in solution, yet remained perfectly functional. In the
ensuing years, we have seen an explosion of experimental and genome-annotation
studies that have mapped the extent of the intrinsic disorder phenomenon and
explored the possible biological rationales for its widespread occurrence.
Answers to the question 'why would a particular domain need to be unstructured?' 
are as varied as the systems where such domains are found. This review provides a
survey of recent new directions in this field, and includes an evaluation of the 
role not only of intrinsically disordered proteins but also of partially
structured and highly dynamic members of the disorder-order continuum.

DOI: 10.1017/S0033583511000060 
PMCID: PMC3189428
PMID: 21729349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Biol Evol. 2011 Sep;28(9):2513-20. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msr068. Epub 2011 Mar 
11.

The relationships among microRNA regulation, intrinsically disordered regions,
and other indicators of protein evolutionary rate.

Chen SC(1), Chuang TJ, Li WH.

Many indicators of protein evolutionary rate have been proposed, but some of them
are interrelated. The purpose of this study is to disentangle their correlations.
We assess the strength of each indicator by controlling for the other indicators 
under study. We find that the number of microRNA (miRNA) types that regulate a
gene is the strongest rate indicator (a negative correlation), followed by
disorder content (the percentage of disordered regions in a protein, a positive
correlation); the strength of disorder content as a rate indicator is
substantially increased after controlling for the number of miRNA types. By
dividing proteins into lowly and highly intrinsically disordered proteins (L-IDPs
and H-IDPs), we find that proteins interacting with more H-IDPs tend to evolve
more slowly, which largely explains the previous observation of a negative
correlation between the number of protein-protein interactions and evolutionary
rate. Moreover, all of the indicators examined here, except for the number of
miRNA types, have different strengths in L-IDPs and in H-IDPs. Finally, the
number of phosphorylation sites is weakly correlated with the number of miRNA
types, and its strength as a rate indicator is substantially reduced when other
indicators are considered. Our study reveals the relative strength of each rate
indicator and increases our understanding of protein evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msr068 
PMCID: PMC3163433
PMID: 21398349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Proteins. 2011 Sep;79(9):2595-606. doi: 10.1002/prot.23077. Epub 2011 Jul 5.

Abundance and functional roles of intrinsic disorder in allergenic proteins and
allergen representative peptides.

Xue B(1), Soeria-Atmadja D, Gustafsson MG, Hammerling U, Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

The pathological process of allergies generally involves an initial activation of
certain immune cells, tied to an ensuing inflammatory reaction on renewed contact
with the allergen. In IgE-mediated hypersensitivity, this typically occurs in
response to otherwise harmless food- or air-borne proteins. As some members of
certain protein families carry special properties that make them allergenic,
exploring protein allergens at the molecular level is instrumental to an improved
understanding of the disease mechanisms, including the identification of relevant
antigen features. For this purpose, we inspected a previously identified set of
allergen representative peptides (ARPs) to scrutinize protein intrinsic disorder.
The resulting study presented here focused on the association between these ARPs 
and protein intrinsic disorder. In addition, the connection between the
disorder-enriched ARPs and UniProt functional keywords was considered. Our
analysis revealed that â¼ 20% of the allergen peptides are highly disordered, and 
that â¼ 77% of ARPs are either located within disordered regions of corresponding 
allergenic proteins or show more disorder/flexibility than their neighbor
regions. Furthermore, among the subset of allergenic proteins, â¼ 70% of the
predicted molecular recognition features (MoRFs that consist of short interactive
disordered regions undergoing disorder-to-order transitions at interaction with
binding partners) were identified as ARPs. These results suggest that intrinsic
disorder and MoRFs may play functional roles in IgE-mediated allergy.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.23077 
PMID: 21732419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Mar 2;12:66. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-66.

Bioinformatics analysis of disordered proteins in prokaryotes.

PavloviÄ-LaÅ¾etiÄ GM(1), MitiÄ NS, KovaÄeviÄ JJ, ObradoviÄ Z, Malkov SN, Beljanski
MV.

BACKGROUND: A significant number of proteins have been shown to be intrinsically 
disordered, meaning that they lack a fixed 3 D structure or contain regions that 
do not posses a well defined 3 D structure. It has also been proven that a
protein's disorder content is related to its function. We have performed an
exhaustive analysis and comparison of the disorder content of proteins from
prokaryotic organisms (i.e., superkingdoms Archaea and Bacteria) with respect to 
functional categories they belong to, i.e., Clusters of Orthologous Groups of
proteins (COGs) and groups of COGs-Cellular processes (Cp), Information storage
and processing (Isp), Metabolism (Me) and Poorly characterized (Pc). We also
analyzed the disorder content of proteins with respect to various genomic,
metabolic and ecological characteristics of the organism they belong to. We used 
correlations and association rule mining in order to identify the most confident 
associations between specific modalities of the characteristics considered and
disorder content.
RESULTS: Bacteria are shown to have a somewhat higher level of protein disorder
than archaea, except for proteins in the Me functional group. It is demonstrated 
that the Isp and Cp functional groups in particular (L-repair function and N-cell
motility and secretion COGs of proteins in specific) possess the highest disorder
content, while Me proteins, in general, posses the lowest. Disorder fractions
have been confirmed to have the lowest level for the so-called order-promoting
amino acids and the highest level for the so-called disorder promoters. For each 
pair of organism characteristics, specific modalities are identified with the
maximum disorder proteins in the corresponding organisms, e.g., high genome
size-high GC content organisms, facultative anaerobic-low GC content organisms,
aerobic-high genome size organisms, etc. Maximum disorder in archaea is observed 
for high GC content-low genome size organisms, high GC content-facultative
anaerobic or aquatic or mesophilic organisms, etc. Maximum disorder in bacteria
is observed for high GC content-high genome size organisms, high genome
size-aerobic organisms, etc. Some of the most reliable association rules mined
establish relationships between high GC content and high protein disorder, medium
GC content and both medium and low protein disorder, anaerobic organisms and
medium protein disorder, Gammaproteobacteria and low protein disorder, etc. A web
site Prokaryote Disorder Database has been designed and implemented at the
address http://bioinfo.matf.bg.ac.rs/disorder, which contains complete results of
the analysis of protein disorder performed for 296 prokaryotic completely
sequenced genomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Exhaustive disorder analysis has been performed by functional
classes of proteins, for a larger dataset of prokaryotic organisms than
previously done. Results obtained are well correlated to those previously
published, with some extension in the range of disorder level and clear
distinction between functional classes of proteins. Wide correlation and
association analysis between protein disorder and genomic and ecological
characteristics has been performed for the first time. The results obtained give 
insight into multi-relationships among the characteristics and protein disorder. 
Such analysis provides for better understanding of the evolutionary process and
may be useful for taxon determination. The main drawback of the approach is the
fact that the disorder considered has been predicted and not experimentally
established.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-66 
PMCID: PMC3062596
PMID: 21366926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29207. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029207. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Disorder predictors also predict backbone dynamics for a family of disordered
proteins.

Daughdrill GW(1), Borcherds WM, Wu H.

Several algorithms have been developed that use amino acid sequences to predict
whether or not a protein or a region of a protein is disordered. These algorithms
make accurate predictions for disordered regions that are 30 amino acids or
longer, but it is unclear whether the predictions can be directly related to the 
backbone dynamics of individual amino acid residues. The nuclear Overhauser
effect between the amide nitrogen and hydrogen (NHNOE) provides an unambiguous
measure of backbone dynamics at single residue resolution and is an excellent
tool for characterizing the dynamic behavior of disordered proteins. In this
report, we show that the NHNOE values for several members of a family of
disordered proteins are highly correlated with the output from three popular
algorithms used to predict disordered regions from amino acid sequence. This is
the first test between an experimental measure of residue specific backbone
dynamics and disorder predictions. The results suggest that some disorder
predictors can accurately estimate the backbone dynamics of individual amino
acids in a long disordered region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029207 
PMCID: PMC3240651
PMID: 22195023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20488. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020488. Epub 2011 May 27.

Markov models of amino acid substitution to study proteins with intrinsically
disordered regions.

Szalkowski AM(1), Anisimova M.

BACKGROUND: Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) or proteins with disordered 
regions (IDRs) do not have a well-defined tertiary structure, but perform a
multitude of functions, often relying on their native disorder to achieve the
binding flexibility through changing to alternative conformations. Intrinsic
disorder is frequently found in all three kingdoms of life, and may occur in
short stretches or span whole proteins. To date most studies contrasting the
differences between ordered and disordered proteins focused on simple summary
statistics. Here, we propose an evolutionary approach to study IDPs, and contrast
patterns specific to ordered protein regions and the corresponding IDRs.
RESULTS: Two empirical Markov models of amino acid substitutions were estimated, 
based on a large set of multiple sequence alignments with experimentally verified
annotations of disordered regions from the DisProt database of IDPs. We applied
new methods to detect differences in Markovian evolution and evolutionary rates
between IDRs and the corresponding ordered protein regions. Further, we
investigated the distribution of IDPs among functional categories, biochemical
pathways and their preponderance to contain tandem repeats.
CONCLUSIONS: We find significant differences in the evolution between ordered and
disordered regions of proteins. Most importantly we find that disorder promoting 
amino acids are more conserved in IDRs, indicating that in some cases not only
amino acid composition but the specific sequence is important for function. This 
conjecture is also reinforced by the observation that for of our data set IDRs
evolve more slowly than the ordered parts of the proteins, while we still support
the common view that IDRs in general evolve more quickly. The improvement in
model fit indicates a possible improvement for various types of analyses e.g. de 
novo disorder prediction using a phylogenetic Hidden Markov Model based on our
matrices showed a performance similar to other disorder predictors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020488 
PMCID: PMC3103576
PMID: 21647374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Proteins. 2011;79 Suppl 10:107-18. doi: 10.1002/prot.23161. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Evaluation of disorder predictions in CASP9.

Monastyrskyy B(1), Fidelis K, Moult J, Tramontano A, Kryshtafovych A.

Lack of stable three-dimensional structure, or intrinsic disorder, is a common
phenomenon in proteins. Naturally, unstructured regions are proven to be
essential for carrying function by many proteins, and therefore identification of
such regions is an important issue. CASP has been assessing the state of the art 
in predicting disorder regions from amino acid sequence since 2002. Here, we
present the results of the evaluation of the disorder predictions submitted to
CASP9. The assessment is based on the evaluation measures and procedures used in 
previous CASPs. The balanced accuracy and the Matthews correlation coefficient
were chosen as basic measures for evaluating the correctness of binary
classifications. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve was
the measure of choice for evaluating probability-based predictions of disorder.
The CASP9 methods are shown to perform slightly better than the CASP7 methods but
not better than the methods in CASP8. It was also shown that capability of most
CASP9 methods to predict disorder decreases with increasing minimum disorder
segment length.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.23161 
PMCID: PMC3212657
PMID: 21928402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Self Nonself. 2011 Jan;2(1):55-72. Epub 2011 Jan 1.

Differential occurrence of protein intrinsic disorder in the cytoplasmic
signaling domains of cell receptors.

Sigalov AB(1), Uversky VN.

In human membrane proteins, intrinsically disordered regions, the regions that
lack a well-defined three-dimensional structure under physiological conditions,
preferentially occur in the cytoplasmic tails. Many of these proteins represent
cell receptors that function by recognizing their cognate ligand outside the cell
and translating this binding information into an intracellular activation signal.
Based on location of recognition and signaling (effector) domains, functionally
diverse and unrelated cell receptors can be classified into two main families:
those in which binding and signaling domains are located on the same protein
chain, the so-called single-chain receptors (SRs), and those in which these
domains are intriguingly located on separate subunits, the so-called multichain
receptors (MRs). Recognition domains of both SRs and MRs are known to be well
ordered. In contrast, while cytoplasmic signaling domains of SRs are
well-structured as well, those of MRs are intrinsically disordered. Despite
important role of receptor signaling in health and disease, extensive comparative
structural analysis of receptor signaling domains has not been carried out as of 
yet. In this study, using a variety of prediction algorithms, we show that
protein disorder is a characteristic and distinctive feature of receptors with
recognition and signaling functions distributed between separate protein chains. 
We also reveal that disorder distribution patterns are rather similar within SR
subclasses suggesting potential functional explanations. Why did nature select
protein disorder to provide intracellular signaling for MRs? Is there any
correlation between disorder profiles of signaling domains and receptor function?
These and other questions are addressed in this article.

DOI: 10.4161/self.2.1.14790 
PMCID: PMC3136905
PMID: 21776336 


82. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 Oct 14;6(10):e1000958. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000958.

Library of disordered patterns in 3D protein structures.

Lobanov MY(1), Furletova EI, Bogatyreva NS, Roytberg MA, Galzitskaya OV.

Intrinsically disordered regions serve as molecular recognition elements, which
play an important role in the control of many cellular processes and signaling
pathways. It is useful to be able to predict positions of disordered regions in
protein chains. The statistical analysis of disordered residues was done
considering 34,464 unique protein chains taken from the PDB database. In this
database, 4.95% of residues are disordered (i.e. invisible in X-ray structures). 
The statistics were obtained separately for the N- and C-termini as well as for
the central part of the protein chain. It has been shown that frequencies of
occurrence of disordered residues of 20 types at the termini of protein chains
differ from the ones in the middle part of the protein chain. Our systematic
analysis of disordered regions in PDB revealed 109 disordered patterns of
different lengths. Each of them has disordered occurrences in at least five
protein chains with identity less than 20%. The vast majority of all occurrences 
of each disordered pattern are disordered. This allows one to use the library of 
disordered patterns for predicting the status of a residue of a given protein to 
be ordered or disordered. We analyzed the occurrence of the selected patterns in 
three eukaryotic and three bacterial proteomes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000958 
PMCID: PMC2954861
PMID: 20976197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Bioinformatics. 2010 Sep 15;26(18):i489-96. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq373.

Improved sequence-based prediction of disordered regions with multilayer fusion
of multiple information sources.

Mizianty MJ(1), Stach W, Chen K, Kedarisetti KD, Disfani FM, Kurgan L.

MOTIVATION: Intrinsically disordered proteins play a crucial role in numerous
regulatory processes. Their abundance and ubiquity combined with a relatively low
quantity of their annotations motivate research toward the development of
computational models that predict disordered regions from protein sequences.
Although the prediction quality of these methods continues to rise, novel and
improved predictors are urgently needed.
RESULTS: We propose a novel method, named MFDp (Multilayered Fusion-based
Disorder predictor), that aims to improve over the current disorder predictors.
MFDp is as an ensemble of 3 Support Vector Machines specialized for the
prediction of short, long and generic disordered regions. It combines three
complementary disorder predictors, sequence, sequence profiles, predicted
secondary structure, solvent accessibility, backbone dihedral torsion angles,
residue flexibility and B-factors. Our method utilizes a custom-designed set of
features that are based on raw predictions and aggregated raw values and
recognizes various types of disorder. The MFDp is compared at the residue level
on two datasets against eight recent disorder predictors and top-performing
methods from the most recent CASP8 experiment. In spite of using training chains 
with <or=25% similarity to the test sequences, our method consistently and
significantly outperforms the other methods based on the MCC index. The MFDp
outperforms modern disorder predictors for the binary disorder assignment and
provides competitive real-valued predictions. The MFDp's outputs are also shown
to outperform the other methods in the identification of proteins with long
disordered regions.
AVAILABILITY: http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/MFDp.html.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq373 
PMCID: PMC2935446
PMID: 20823312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Jun;1804(6):1231-64. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.01.017. Epub 2010 Feb 1.

Understanding protein non-folding.

Uversky VN(1), Dunker AK.

This review describes the family of intrinsically disordered proteins, members of
which fail to form rigid 3-D structures under physiological conditions, either
along their entire lengths or only in localized regions. Instead, these
intriguing proteins/regions exist as dynamic ensembles within which atom
positions and backbone Ramachandran angles exhibit extreme temporal fluctuations 
without specific equilibrium values. Many of these intrinsically disordered
proteins are known to carry out important biological functions which, in fact,
depend on the absence of a specific 3-D structure. The existence of such proteins
does not fit the prevailing structure-function paradigm, which states that a
unique 3-D structure is a prerequisite to function. Thus, the protein
structure-function paradigm has to be expanded to include intrinsically
disordered proteins and alternative relationships among protein sequence,
structure, and function. This shift in the paradigm represents a major
breakthrough for biochemistry, biophysics and molecular biology, as it opens new 
levels of understanding with regard to the complex life of proteins. This review 
will try to answer the following questions: how were intrinsically disordered
proteins discovered? Why don't these proteins fold? What is so special about
intrinsic disorder? What are the functional advantages of disordered
proteins/regions? What is the functional repertoire of these proteins? What are
the relationships between intrinsically disordered proteins and human diseases?

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.01.017 
PMCID: PMC2882790
PMID: 20117254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 May 28;4 Suppl 1:S1. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-S1-S1.

Archaic chaos: intrinsically disordered proteins in Archaea.

Xue B(1), Williams RW, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

BACKGROUND: Many proteins or their regions known as intrinsically disordered
proteins (IDPs) and intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) lack unique 3D
structure in their native states under physiological conditions yet fulfill key
biological functions. Earlier bioinformatics studies showed that IDPs and IDRs
are highly abundant in different proteomes and carry out mostly regulatory
functions related to molecular recognition and signal transduction. Archaea
belong to an intriguing domain of life whose members, being microbes, are
characterized by a unique mosaic-like combination of bacterial and eukaryotic
properties and include inhabitants of some of the most extreme environments on
the planet. With the expansion of the archaea genome data (more than fifty
archaea species from five different phyla are known now), and with recent
improvements in the accuracy of intrinsic disorder prediction, it is time to
re-examine the abundance of IDPs and IDRs in the archaea domain.
RESULTS: The abundance of IDPs and IDRs in 53 archaea species is analyzed. The
amino acid composition profiles of these species are generally quite different
from each other. The disordered content is highly species-dependent.
Thermoproteales proteomes have 14% of disordered residues, while in Halobacteria,
this value increases to 34%. In proteomes of these two phyla, proteins containing
long disordered regions account for 12% and 46%, whereas 4% and 26% their
proteins are wholly disordered. These three measures of disorder content are
linearly correlated with each other at the genome level. There is a weak
correlation between the environmental factors (such as salinity, pH and
temperature of the habitats) and the abundance of intrinsic disorder in Archaea, 
with various environmental factors possessing different disorder-promoting
strengths. Harsh environmental conditions, especially those combining several
hostile factors, clearly favor increased disorder content. Intrinsic disorder is 
highly abundant in functional Pfam domains of the archaea origin. The analysis
based on the disordered content and phylogenetic tree indicated diverse evolution
of intrinsic disorder among various classes and species of Archaea.
CONCLUSIONS: Archaea proteins are rich in intrinsic disorder. Some of these IDPs 
and IDRs likely evolve to help archaea to accommodate to their hostile habitats. 
Other archaean IDPs and IDRs possess crucial biological functions similar to
those of the bacterial and eukaryotic IDPs/IDRs.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-S1-S1 
PMCID: PMC2880407
PMID: 20522251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Apr;1804(4):996-1010. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.01.011. Epub 2010 Jan 25.

PONDR-FIT: a meta-predictor of intrinsically disordered amino acids.

Xue B(1), Dunbrack RL, Williams RW, Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

Protein intrinsic disorder is becoming increasingly recognized in proteomics
research. While lacking structure, many regions of disorder have been associated 
with biological function. There are many different experimental methods for
characterizing intrinsically disordered proteins and regions; nevertheless, the
prediction of intrinsic disorder from amino acid sequence remains a useful
strategy especially for many large-scale proteomic investigations. Here we
introduced a consensus artificial neural network (ANN) prediction method, which
was developed by combining the outputs of several individual disorder predictors.
By eight-fold cross-validation, this meta-predictor, called PONDR-FIT, was found 
to improve the prediction accuracy over a range of 3 to 20% with an average of
11% compared to the single predictors, depending on the datasets being used.
Analysis of the errors shows that the worst accuracy still occurs for short
disordered regions with less than ten residues, as well as for the residues close
to order/disorder boundaries. Increased understanding of the underlying mechanism
by which such meta-predictors give improved predictions will likely promote the
further development of protein disorder predictors. Access to PONDR-FIT is
available at www.disprot.org.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.01.011 
PMCID: PMC2882806
PMID: 20100603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Mar 23;107(12):5429-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0907841107. Epub 2010 Mar 8.

Dual coding in alternative reading frames correlates with intrinsic protein
disorder.

Kovacs E(1), Tompa P, Liliom K, Kalmar L.

Numerous human genes display dual coding within alternatively spliced regions,
which give rise to distinct protein products that include segments translated in 
more than one reading frame. To resolve the ensuing protein structural puzzle, we
identified 67 human genes with alternative splice variants comprising a
dual-coding region at least 75 nucleotides in length and analyzed the structural 
status of the protein segments they encode. The inspection of their amino acid
composition and predictions by the IUPred and PONDR VSL2 algorithms suggest a
high propensity for structural disorder in dual-coding regions. In the case of +1
frameshifts, the average level of disorder in the two frames is similarly high
(47.2% in the ancestral frame, 58.2% in the derived frame, with the average level
of disorder in human proteins being approximately 30%), whereas in the case of -1
frameshifts, there is a significant tendency to become more disordered upon
shifting the frame (16.7% in the ancestral frame, 56.3% in the derived frame).
The regions encoded by the derived frame are mostly disordered (disorder
percentage > 50%) in 39 out of 62 cases, which strongly suggests that structural 
disorder enables these protein products to exist and function without the need of
a highly evolved 3D fold. The potential advantages are also demonstrated by the
appearance of novel functions and the high incidence of transcripts escaping
nonsense-mediated decay. By discussing several examples, we demonstrate that dual
coding may be an effective mechanism for the evolutionary appearance of novel
intrinsically disordered regions with new functions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907841107 
PMCID: PMC2851785
PMID: 20212158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Bioinformatics. 2010 Mar 1;26(5):625-31. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq012. Epub
2010 Jan 16.

Protein secondary structure appears to be robust under in silico evolution while 
protein disorder appears not to be.

Schaefer C(1), Schlessinger A, Rost B.

MOTIVATION: The mutation of amino acids often impacts protein function and
structure. Mutations without negative effect sustain evolutionary pressure. We
study a particular aspect of structural robustness with respect to mutations:
regular protein secondary structure and natively unstructured (intrinsically
disordered) regions. Is the formation of regular secondary structure an intrinsic
feature of amino acid sequences, or is it a feature that is lost upon mutation
and is maintained by evolution against the odds? Similarly, is disorder an
intrinsic sequence feature or is it difficult to maintain? To tackle these
questions, we in silico mutated native protein sequences into random
sequence-like ensembles and monitored the change in predicted secondary structure
and disorder.
RESULTS: We established that by our coarse-grained measures for change,
predictions and observations were similar, suggesting that our results were not
biased by prediction mistakes. Changes in secondary structure and disorder
predictions were linearly proportional to the change in sequence. Surprisingly,
neither the content nor the length distribution for the predicted secondary
structure changed substantially. Regions with long disorder behaved differently
in that significantly fewer such regions were predicted after a few mutation
steps. Our findings suggest that the formation of regular secondary structure is 
an intrinsic feature of random amino acid sequences, while the formation of
long-disordered regions is not an intrinsic feature of proteins with disordered
regions. Put differently, helices and strands appear to be maintained easily by
evolution, whereas maintaining disordered regions appears difficult. Neutral
mutations with respect to disorder are therefore very unlikely.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq012 
PMCID: PMC2828120
PMID: 20081223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Brief Bioinform. 2010 Mar;11(2):225-43. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbp061. Epub 2009 Dec
10.

Bioinformatical approaches to characterize intrinsically disordered/unstructured 
proteins.

DosztÃ¡nyi Z(1), MÃ©szÃ¡ros B, Simon I.

Intrinsically disordered/unstructured proteins exist without a stable
three-dimensional (3D) structure as highly flexible conformational ensembles. The
available genome sequences revealed that these proteins are surprisingly common
and their frequency reaches high proportions in eukaryotes. Due to their vital
role in various biological processes including signaling and regulation and their
involvement in various diseases, disordered proteins and protein segments are the
focus of many biochemical, molecular biological, pathological and pharmaceutical 
studies. These proteins are difficult to study experimentally because of the lack
of unique structure in the isolated form. Their amino acid sequence, however, is 
available, and can be used for their identification and characterization by
bioinformatic tools, analogously to globular proteins. In this review, we first
present a small survey of current methods to identify disordered proteins or
protein segments, focusing on those that are publicly available as web servers.
In more detail we also discuss approaches that predict disordered regions and
specific regions involved in protein binding by modeling the physical background 
of protein disorder. In our review we argue that the heterogeneity of disordered 
segments needs to be taken into account for a better understanding of protein
disorder.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbp061 
PMID: 20007729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;609:307-25. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-241-4_18.

Conformational disorder.

Longhi S(1), Lieutaud P, Canard B.

In recent years it was shown that a large number of proteins are either fully or 
partially disordered. Intrinsically disordered proteins are ubiquitary proteins
that fulfill essential biological functions while lacking a stable 3D structure. 
Despite the large abundance of disorder, disordered regions are still poorly
detected. The identification of disordered regions facilitates the functional
annotation of proteins and is instrumental in delineating boundaries of protein
domains amenable to crystallization. This chapter focuses on the methods
currently employed for predicting disorder and identifying regions involved in
induced folding.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-60327-241-4_18 
PMID: 20221927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Proteins. 2010 Jan;78(1):212-21. doi: 10.1002/prot.22504.

Modularity of intrinsic disorder in the human proteome.

Pentony MM(1), Jones DT.

Predicting regions of disorder has become of increasing interest when determining
protein structure and function. With approximately 33% of eukaryotic proteins
having significant disordered regions, and an increasing occurrence of disorder
in higher organisms, an analysis of the importance of disorder from an
evolutionary perspective was clearly warranted. Focusing on the human proteome,
we have studied how abundant disorder is and its relevance to protein function
and structure. We have shown that disordered regions frequently appear to be
independent functional units, and judged by complete association to certain
protein domains, may be evolutionarily conserved. Our work also supports previous
analyses on association between disorder and alternate splicing and provides
support for the modularity of disorder by showing that with respect to splicing
events, disordered regions frequently appear to be spliced as whole units.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.22504 
PMID: 19626706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Biosyst. 2009 Dec;5(12):1688-1702. doi: 10.1039/B905913J.

Analysis of structured and intrinsically disordered regions of transmembrane
proteins.

Xue B(1), Li L, Meroueh SO, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Integral membrane proteins display two major types of transmembrane structure,
helical bundles and beta barrels. The main functional roles of transmembrane
proteins are the transport of small molecules and cell signaling, and sometimes
these two roles are coupled. For cytosolic, water-soluble proteins, signaling and
regulatory functions are often carried out by intrinsically disordered regions.
Our long range goal is to determine whether integral membrane proteins likewise
use disordered regions for signaling and regulation. Here we carried out a
systematic bioinformatics investigation of intrinsically disordered regions
obtained from integral membrane proteins for which crystal structures have been
determined, and for which the intrinsic disorder was identified as missing
electron density. We found 120 disorder-containing integral membrane proteins
having a total of 33675 residues, with 3209 of the residues distributed among 240
different disordered regions. These disordered regions were compared with those
obtained from water-soluble proteins with regards to their amino acid
compositional biases, and to the accuracies of various disorder predictors. The
results of these analyses show that the disordered regions from helical bundle
integral membrane proteins, those from beta barrel integral membrane proteins,
and those from water soluble proteins all exhibit statistically distinct amino
acid compositional biases. Despite these differences in composition, current
algorithms make reasonably accurate predictions of disorder for these membrane
proteins. Although the small size of the current data sets are limiting, these
results suggest that developing new predictors that make use of data from
disordered regions in helical bundles and beta barrels, especially as these
datasets increase in size, will likely lead to significantly more accurate
disorder predictions for these two classes of integral membrane proteins.

DOI: 10.1039/B905913J 
PMCID: PMC2887740
PMID: 19585006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 24;106(47):19819-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0907710106. Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Toward a quantitative theory of intrinsically disordered proteins and their
function.

Liu J(1), Faeder JR, Camacho CJ.

A large number of proteins are sufficiently unstable that their full 3D structure
cannot be resolved. The origins of this intrinsic disorder are not well
understood, but its ubiquitous presence undercuts the principle that a protein's 
structure determines its function. Here we present a quantitative theory that
makes predictions regarding the role of intrinsic disorder in protein structure
and function. In particular, we discuss the implications of analytical solutions 
of a series of fundamental thermodynamic models of protein interactions in which 
disordered proteins are characterized by positive folding free energies. We
validate our predictions by assigning protein function by using the gene ontology
classification--in which "protein binding", "catalytic activity", and
"transcription regulator activity" are the three largest functional
categories--and by performing genome-wide surveys of both the amount of disorder 
in these functional classes and binding affinities for both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic genomes. Specifically, without assuming any a priori
structure-function relationship, the theory predicts that both catalytic and
low-affinity binding (K(d) greater, >or= 0(-7) M) proteins prefer ordered
structures, whereas only high-affinity binding proteins (found mostly in
eukaryotes) can tolerate disorder. Relevant to both transcription and signal
transduction, the theory also explains how increasing disorder can tune the
binding affinity to maximize the specificity of promiscuous interactions.
Collectively, these studies provide insight into how natural selection acts on
folding stability to optimize protein function.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907710106 
PMCID: PMC2775701
PMID: 19903882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009 Sep;5(9):e1000497. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000497. Epub
2009 Sep 4.

Influence of sequence changes and environment on intrinsically disordered
proteins.

Mohan A(1), Uversky VN, Radivojac P.

Many large-scale studies on intrinsically disordered proteins are implicitly
based on the structural models deposited in the Protein Data Bank. Yet, the
static nature of deposited models supplies little insight into variation of
protein structure and function under diverse cellular and environmental
conditions. While the computational predictability of disordered regions provides
practical evidence that disorder is an intrinsic property of proteins, the
robustness of disordered regions to changes in sequence or environmental
conditions has not been systematically studied. We analyzed intrinsically
disordered regions in the same or similar proteins crystallized independently and
studied their sensitivity to changes in protein sequence and parameters of
crystallographic experiments. The observed changes in the existence, position,
and length of disordered regions indicate that their appearance in X-ray
structures dramatically depends on changes in amino acid sequence and
peculiarities of the crystallographic experiment. Our study also raises general
questions regarding protein evolution and the regulation of protein structure,
dynamics, and function via variations in cellular and environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000497 
PMCID: PMC2727479
PMID: 19730682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cell Res. 2009 Aug;19(8):929-49. doi: 10.1038/cr.2009.87.

Predicting intrinsic disorder in proteins: an overview.

He B(1), Wang K, Liu Y, Xue B, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

The discovery of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDP) (i.e., biologically
active proteins that do not possess stable secondary and/or tertiary structures) 
came as an unexpected surprise, as the existence of such proteins is in
contradiction to the traditional "sequence-->structure-->function" paradigm.
Accurate prediction of a protein's predisposition to be intrinsically disordered 
is a necessary prerequisite for the further understanding of principles and
mechanisms of protein folding and function, and is a key for the elaboration of a
new structural and functional hierarchy of proteins. Therefore, prediction of
IDPs has attracted the attention of many researchers, and a number of prediction 
tools have been developed. Predictions of disorder, in turn, are playing major
roles in directing laboratory experiments that are leading to the discovery of
ever more disordered proteins, and thereby leading to a positive feedback loop in
the investigation of these proteins. In this review of algorithms for intrinsic
disorder prediction, the basic concepts of various prediction methods for IDPs
are summarized, the strengths and shortcomings of many of the methods are
analyzed, and the difficulties and directions of future development of IDP
prediction techniques are discussed.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2009.87 
PMID: 19597536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. BMC Genomics. 2009 Jul 7;10 Suppl 1:S12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-S1-S12.

Protein disorder in the human diseasome: unfoldomics of human genetic diseases.

Midic U(1), Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Uversky VN.

BACKGROUND: Intrinsically disordered proteins lack stable structure under
physiological conditions, yet carry out many crucial biological functions,
especially functions associated with regulation, recognition, signaling and
control. Recently, human genetic diseases and related genes were organized into a
bipartite graph (Goh KI, Cusick ME, Valle D, Childs B, Vidal M, et al. (2007) The
human disease network. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104: 8685-8690). This diseasome
network revealed several significant features such as the common genetic origin
of many diseases.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We analyzed the abundance of intrinsic disorder in these
diseasome network proteins by means of several prediction algorithms, and we
analyzed the functional repertoires of these proteins based on prior studies
relating disorder to function. Our analyses revealed that (i) Intrinsic disorder 
is common in proteins associated with many human genetic diseases; (ii) Different
disease classes vary in the IDP contents of their associated proteins; (iii)
Molecular recognition features, which are relatively short loosely structured
protein regions within mostly disordered sequences and which gain structure upon 
binding to partners, are common in the diseasome, and their abundance correlates 
with the intrinsic disorder level; (iv) Some disease classes have a significant
fraction of genes affected by alternative splicing, and the alternatively spliced
regions in the corresponding proteins are predicted to be highly disordered; and 
(v) Correlations were found among the various diseasome graph-related properties 
and intrinsic disorder.
CONCLUSION: These observations provide the basis for the construction of the
human-genetic-disease-associated unfoldome.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-S1-S12 
PMCID: PMC2709255
PMID: 19594871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. FEBS Lett. 2009 May 6;583(9):1469-74. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.03.070. Epub
2009 Apr 5.

CDF it all: consensus prediction of intrinsically disordered proteins based on
various cumulative distribution functions.

Xue B(1), Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

Many biologically active proteins are intrinsically disordered. A reasonable
understanding of the disorder status of these proteins may be beneficial for
better understanding of their structures and functions. The disorder contents of 
disordered proteins vary dramatically, with two extremes being fully ordered and 
fully disordered proteins. Often, it is necessary to perform a binary
classification and classify a whole protein as ordered or disordered. Here, an
improved error estimation technique was applied to develop the cumulative
distribution function (CDF) algorithms for several established disorder
predictors. A consensus binary predictor, based on the artificial neural
networks, NN-CDF, was developed by using output of the individual CDFs. The
consensus method outperforms the individual predictors by 4-5% in the averaged
accuracy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.03.070 
PMCID: PMC2683465
PMID: 19351533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009 May;5(5):e1000376. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000376. Epub
2009 May 1.

Prediction of protein binding regions in disordered proteins.

MÃ©szÃ¡ros B(1), Simon I, DosztÃ¡nyi Z.

Many disordered proteins function via binding to a structured partner and undergo
a disorder-to-order transition. The coupled folding and binding can confer
several functional advantages such as the precise control of binding specificity 
without increased affinity. Additionally, the inherent flexibility allows the
binding site to adopt various conformations and to bind to multiple partners.
These features explain the prevalence of such binding elements in signaling and
regulatory processes. In this work, we report ANCHOR, a method for the prediction
of disordered binding regions. ANCHOR relies on the pairwise energy estimation
approach that is the basis of IUPred, a previous general disorder prediction
method. In order to predict disordered binding regions, we seek to identify
segments that are in disordered regions, cannot form enough favorable intrachain 
interactions to fold on their own, and are likely to gain stabilizing energy by
interacting with a globular protein partner. The performance of ANCHOR was found 
to be largely independent from the amino acid composition and adopted secondary
structure. Longer binding sites generally were predicted to be segmented, in
agreement with available experimentally characterized examples. Scanning several 
hundred proteomes showed that the occurrence of disordered binding sites
increased with the complexity of the organisms even compared to disordered
regions in general. Furthermore, the length distribution of binding sites was
different from disordered protein regions in general and was dominated by shorter
segments. These results underline the importance of disordered proteins and
protein segments in establishing new binding regions. Due to their specific
biophysical properties, disordered binding sites generally carry a robust
sequence signal, and this signal is efficiently captured by our method. Through
its generality, ANCHOR opens new ways to study the essential functional sites of 
disordered proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000376 
PMCID: PMC2671142
PMID: 19412530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochemistry. 2009 Apr 28;48(16):3669-77. doi: 10.1021/bi900113v.

Polyelectrolyte domains and intrinsic disorder within the prismatic Asprich
protein family.

Delak K(1), Collino S, Evans JS.

A number of fully functional proteins have been identified to exist in a
partially or fully disordered state. These intrinsically disordered proteins
(IDP) are recognized as an important sequence class that fulfill many roles. A
number of biomineral-associated proteins, particularly those which possess
polyelectrolyte domains, represent potential members of the IDP class. This
report describes a bioinformatics study of a ten member polyanionic sequence
biomineralization protein family, Asprich, and the experimental characterization 
of the conserved N- and C-terminal regions found within seven members of this
family. Using protein disorder prediction algorithms (DPROT, PONDR, GLOBPLOT), we
confirm that all ten Asprich protein sequences are disordered, and that two
polyelectrolyte domains within each protein contribute to the disorder scoring.
Using synthetic peptides which model the conserved N- (F1,48 AA) and C-terminal
(F2, 42 AA) domains, we determine that both domains are globally disordered and
remain so in the presence of Ca(II). However, F1 and F2 possess differing
proportions of extended beta strand relative to random coil structure and
sequence spacing of Asp, Glu residues. As a result, the F2 sequence possesses a
higher anionic surface charge density, solvent accessibility, and greater degree 
of local conformational response to Ca(II). These differences may explain why F1 
and F2 differ with regard to step growth kinetics, mineral modulation, and metal 
ion complexation, and possibly distinguish the molecular role(s) that each domain
conveys to the Asprich protein family. Structural and surface charge density
features may also control the function of Asp, Glu polyelectrolyte domains within
other IDP proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/bi900113v 
PMID: 19344178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Jan 7;10:8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-8.

Large-scale prediction of long disordered regions in proteins using random
forests.

Han P(1), Zhang X, Norton RS, Feng ZP.

BACKGROUND: Many proteins contain disordered regions that lack fixed
three-dimensional (3D) structure under physiological conditions but have
important biological functions. Prediction of disordered regions in protein
sequences is important for understanding protein function and in high-throughput 
determination of protein structures. Machine learning techniques, including
neural networks and support vector machines have been widely used in such
predictions. Predictors designed for long disordered regions are usually less
successful in predicting short disordered regions. Combining prediction of short 
and long disordered regions will dramatically increase the complexity of the
prediction algorithm and make the predictor unsuitable for large-scale
applications. Efficient batch prediction of long disordered regions alone is of
greater interest in large-scale proteome studies.
RESULTS: A new algorithm, IUPforest-L, for predicting long disordered regions
using the random forest learning model is proposed in this paper. IUPforest-L is 
based on the Moreau-Broto auto-correlation function of amino acid indices (AAIs) 
and other physicochemical features of the primary sequences. In 10-fold cross
validation tests, IUPforest-L can achieve an area of 89.5% under the receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve. Compared with existing disorder predictors,
IUPforest-L has high prediction accuracy and is efficient for predicting long
disordered regions in large-scale proteomes.
CONCLUSION: The random forest model based on the auto-correlation functions of
the AAIs within a protein fragment and other physicochemical features could
effectively detect long disordered regions in proteins. A new predictor,
IUPforest-L, was developed to batch predict long disordered regions in proteins, 
and the server can be accessed from
http://dmg.cs.rmit.edu.au/IUPforest/IUPforest-L.php.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-8 
PMCID: PMC2637845
PMID: 19128505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2008 Dec;18(6):756-64. doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2008.10.002.
Epub 2008 Nov 17.

Function and structure of inherently disordered proteins.

Dunker AK(1), Silman I, Uversky VN, Sussman JL.

The application of bioinformatics methodologies to proteins inherently lacking 3D
structure has brought increased attention to these macromolecules. Here topics
concerning these proteins are discussed, including their prediction from amino
acid sequence, their enrichment in eukaryotes compared to prokaryotes, their more
rapid evolution compared to structured proteins, their organization into specific
groups, their structural preferences, their half-lives in cells, their
contributions to signaling diversity (via high contents of multiple-partner
binding sites, post-translational modifications, and alternative splicing), their
distinct functional repertoire compared to that of structured proteins, and their
involvement in diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.2008.10.002 
PMID: 18952168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Theor Biol. 2008 Oct 21;254(4):799-803. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2008.05.040. Epub
2008 Jun 14.

Using Bayesian multinomial classifier to predict whether a given protein sequence
is intrinsically disordered.

Bulashevska A(1), Eils R.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) lack a well-defined three-dimensional
structure under physiological conditions. Intrinsic disorder is a common
phenomenon, particularly in multicellular eukaryotes, and is responsible for
important protein functions including regulation and signaling. Many
disease-related proteins are likely to be intrinsically disordered or to have
disordered regions. In this paper, a new predictor model based on the Bayesian
classification methodology is introduced to predict for a given protein or
protein region if it is intrinsically disordered or ordered using only its
primary sequence. The method allows to incorporate length-dependent amino acid
compositional differences of disordered regions by including separate statistical
representations for short, middle and long disordered regions. The predictor was 
trained on the constructed data set of protein regions with known structural
properties. In a Jack-knife test, the predictor achieved the sensitivity of 89.2%
for disordered and 81.4% for ordered regions. Our method outperformed several
reported predictors when evaluated on the previously published data set of
Prilusky et al. [2005. FoldIndex: a simple tool to predict whether a given
protein sequence is intrinsically unfolded. Bioinformatics 21 (16), 3435-3438].
Further strength of our approach is the ease of implementation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2008.05.040 
PMID: 18611404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. BMC Genomics. 2008 Sep 16;9 Suppl 2:S4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-S2-S4.

Protein intrinsic disorder toolbox for comparative analysis of viral proteins.

Goh GK(1), Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

To examine the usefulness of protein disorder predictions as a tool for the
comparative analysis of viral proteins, a relational database has been
constructed. The database includes proteins from influenza A and HIV-related
viruses. Annotations include viral protein sequence, disorder prediction,
structure, and function. Location of each protein within a virion, if known, is
also denoted. Our analysis reveals a clear relationship between proximity to the 
RNA core and the percentage of predicted disordered residues for a set of
influenza A virus proteins. Neuraminidases (NA) and hemagglutinin (HA) of major
influenza A pandemics tend to pair in such a way that both proteins tend to be
either ordered-ordered or disordered-disordered by prediction. This may be the
result of these proteins evolving from being lipid-associated. High abundance of 
intrinsic disorder in envelope and matrix proteins from HIV-related viruses
likely represents a mechanism where HIV virions can escape immune response
despite the availability of antibodies for the HIV-related proteins. This
exercise provides an example showing how the combined use of intrinsic disorder
predictions and relational databases provides an improved understanding of the
functional and structural behaviour of viral proteins.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-S2-S4 
PMCID: PMC2559894
PMID: 18831795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. BMC Genomics. 2008 Sep 16;9 Suppl 2:S1. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-S2-S1.

The unfoldomics decade: an update on intrinsically disordered proteins.

Dunker AK(1), Oldfield CJ, Meng J, Romero P, Yang JY, Chen JW, Vacic V, Obradovic
Z, Uversky VN.

BACKGROUND: Our first predictor of protein disorder was published just over a
decade ago in the Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Neural
Networks (Romero P, Obradovic Z, Kissinger C, Villafranca JE, Dunker AK (1997)
Identifying disordered regions in proteins from amino acid sequence. Proceedings 
of the IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks, 1: 90-95). By now more
than twenty other laboratory groups have joined the efforts to improve the
prediction of protein disorder. While the various prediction methodologies used
for protein intrinsic disorder resemble those methodologies used for secondary
structure prediction, the two types of structures are entirely different. For
example, the two structural classes have very different dynamic properties, with 
the irregular secondary structure class being much less mobile than the disorder 
class. The prediction of secondary structure has been useful. On the other hand, 
the prediction of intrinsic disorder has been revolutionary, leading to major
modifications of the more than 100 year-old views relating protein structure and 
function. Experimentalists have been providing evidence over many decades that
some proteins lack fixed structure or are disordered (or unfolded) under
physiological conditions. In addition, experimentalists are also showing that,
for many proteins, their functions depend on the unstructured rather than
structured state; such results are in marked contrast to the greater than hundred
year old views such as the lock and key hypothesis. Despite extensive data on
many important examples, including disease-associated proteins, the importance of
disorder for protein function has been largely ignored. Indeed, to our knowledge,
current biochemistry books don't present even one acknowledged example of a
disorder-dependent function, even though some reports of disorder-dependent
functions are more than 50 years old. The results from genome-wide predictions of
intrinsic disorder and the results from other bioinformatics studies of intrinsic
disorder are demanding attention for these proteins.
RESULTS: Disorder prediction has been important for showing that the relatively
few experimentally characterized examples are members of a very large collection 
of related disordered proteins that are wide-spread over all three domains of
life. Many significant biological functions are now known to depend directly on, 
or are importantly associated with, the unfolded or partially folded state. Here 
our goal is to review the key discoveries and to weave these discoveries together
to support novel approaches for understanding sequence-function relationships.
CONCLUSION: Intrinsically disordered protein is common across the three domains
of life, but especially common among the eukaryotic proteomes. Signaling
sequences and sites of posttranslational modifications are frequently, or very
likely most often, located within regions of intrinsic disorder.
Disorder-to-order transitions are coupled with the adoption of different
structures with different partners. Also, the flexibility of intrinsic disorder
helps different disordered regions to bind to a common binding site on a common
partner. Such capacity for binding diversity plays important roles in both
protein-protein interaction networks and likely also in gene regulation networks.
Such disorder-based signaling is further modulated in multicellular eukaryotes by
alternative splicing, for which such splicing events map to regions of disorder
much more often than to regions of structure. Associating alternative splicing
with disorder rather than structure alleviates theoretical and experimentally
observed problems associated with the folding of different length, isomeric amino
acid sequences. The combination of disorder and alternative splicing is proposed 
to provide a mechanism for easily "trying out" different signaling pathways,
thereby providing the mechanism for generating signaling diversity and enabling
the evolution of cell differentiation and multicellularity. Finally, several
recent small molecules of interest as potential drugs have been shown to act by
blocking protein-protein interactions based on intrinsic disorder of one of the
partners. Study of these examples has led to a new approach for drug discovery,
and bioinformatics analysis of the human proteome suggests that various
disease-associated proteins are very rich in such disorder-based drug discovery
targets.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-S2-S1 
PMCID: PMC2559873
PMID: 18831774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Bioinformatics. 2008 Jun 1;24(11):1344-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn195.
Epub 2008 Apr 20.

Prediction of disordered regions in proteins based on the meta approach.

Ishida T(1), Kinoshita K.

MOTIVATION: Intrinsically disordered regions in proteins have no unique stable
structures without their partner molecules, thus these regions sometimes prevent 
high-quality structure determination. Furthermore, proteins with disordered
regions are often involved in important biological processes, and the disordered 
regions are considered to play important roles in molecular interactions.
Therefore, identifying disordered regions is important to obtain high-resolution 
structural information and to understand the functional aspects of these
proteins.
RESULTS: We developed a new prediction method for disordered regions in proteins 
based on the meta approach and implemented a web-server for this prediction
method named 'metaPrDOS'. The method predicts the disorder tendency of each
residue using support vector machines from the prediction results of the seven
independent predictors. Evaluation of the meta approach was performed using the
CASP7 prediction targets to avoid an overestimation due to the inclusion of
proteins used in the training set of some component predictors. As a result, the 
meta approach achieved higher prediction accuracy than all methods participating 
in CASP7.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn195 
PMID: 18426805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Int J Data Min Bioinform. 2008;2(2):121-33.

Identification of Intrinsically Unstructured Proteins using hierarchical
classifier.

Yang JY(1), Yang MQ.

It is suggested that protein functions only when folded into a particular 3-D
structure. Recently, many protein regions and some entire proteins have been
identified with no definite tertiary structure, but presenting instead as
dynamic, disorder ensembles under different physiochemical circumstances. These
proteins and regions are known as Intrinsically Unstructured regions and Proteins
(IUP). We constructed a Recursive Maximum Contrast Tree (RMCT) based classifier
to identify IUP. The classifier has been benchmarked against industrial standard 
PONDR VLXT on out-of-sample data by external evaluators. The IUP predictor is a
viable alternative software tool for identifying intrinsic unstructured regions
and proteins.


PMID: 18767350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Methods Mol Biol. 2008;426:103-15. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-058-8_6.

Prediction of protein disorder.

DosztÃ¡nyi Z(1), Tompa P.

The recent advance in our understanding of the relation of protein structure and 
function cautions that many proteins, or regions of proteins, exist and function 
without a well-defined three-dimensional structure. These intrinsically
disordered/unstructured proteins (IDP/IUP) are frequent in proteomes and carry
out essential functions, but their lack of stable structures hampers efforts of
solving structures at high resolution by x-ray crystallography and/or NMR. Thus, 
filtering such proteins/regions out of high-throughput structural genomics
pipelines would be of significant benefit in terms of cost and success rate. This
chapter outlines the theoretical background of structural disorder, and provides 
practical advice on the application of advanced bioinformatic predictors to this 
end, that is to recognize fully/mostly disordered proteins or regions, which are 
incompatible with structure determination. An emphasis is also given to a
somewhat different approach, in which ordered/disordered regions are explicitly
delineated to the end of making constructs amenable for structure determination
even when disordered regions are present.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-60327-058-8_6 
PMID: 18542859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Open Biochem J. 2008;2:1-5. doi: 10.2174/1874091X00802010001. Epub 2008 Jan 18.

Consensus prediction of protein conformational disorder from amino acidic
sequence.

Kumar S(1), Carugo O.

Predictions of protein conformational disorder are important in structural
biology since they can allow the elimination of protein constructs, the
three-dimensional structure of which cannot be determined since they are natively
unfolded. Here a new procedure is presented that allows one to predict with high 
accuracy disordered residues on the basis of protein sequences. It makes use of
twelve prediction methods and merges their results by using least-squares
optimization. A statistical survey of the Protein Data Bank is also reported, in 
order to know how many residues can be disordered in proteins that were
crystallized and the three-dimensional structure of which was determined.

DOI: 10.2174/1874091X00802010001 
PMCID: PMC2570547
PMID: 18949069 


109. Protein Pept Lett. 2008;15(9):956-63.

TOP-IDP-scale: a new amino acid scale measuring propensity for intrinsic
disorder.

Campen A(1), Williams RM, Brown CJ, Meng J, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Intrinsically disordered proteins carry out various biological functions while
lacking ordered secondary and/or tertiary structure. In order to find general
intrinsic properties of amino acid residues that are responsible for the absence 
of ordered structure in intrinsically disordered proteins we surveyed 517 amino
acid scales. Each of these scales was taken as an independent attribute for the
subsequent analysis. For a given attribute value X, which is averaged over a
consecutive string of amino acids, and for a given data set having both ordered
and disordered segments, the conditional probabilities P(s(o) | x) and P(s(d) |
x) for order and disorder, respectively, can be determined for all possible
values of X. Plots of the conditional probabilities P(s(o) | x) and P(s(o) | x)
versus X give a pair of curves. The area between these two curves divided by the 
total area of the graph gives the area ratio value (ARV), which is proportional
to the degree of separation of the two probability curves and, therefore,
provides a measure of the given attribute's power to discriminate between order
and disorder. As ARV falls between zero and one, larger ARV corresponds to the
better discrimination between order and disorder. Starting from the scale with
the highest ARV, we applied a simulated annealing procedure to search for
alternative scale values and have managed to increase the ARV by more than 10%.
The ranking of the amino acids in this new TOP-IDP scale is as follows (from
order promoting to disorder promoting): W, F, Y, I, M, L, V, N, C, T, A, G, R, D,
H, Q, K, S, E, P. A web-based server has been created to apply the TOP-IDP scale 
to predict intrinsically disordered proteins
(http://www.disprot.org/dev/disindex.php).


PMCID: PMC2676888
PMID: 18991772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007 Jul;35(Web Server issue):W460-4. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

PrDOS: prediction of disordered protein regions from amino acid sequence.

Ishida T(1), Kinoshita K.

PrDOS is a server that predicts the disordered regions of a protein from its
amino acid sequence (http://prdos.hgc.jp). The server accepts a single protein
amino acid sequence, in either plain text or FASTA format. The prediction system 
is composed of two predictors: a predictor based on local amino acid sequence
information and one based on template proteins. The server combines the results
of the two predictors and returns a two-state prediction (order/disorder) and a
disorder probability for each residue. The prediction results are sent by e-mail,
and the server also provides a web-interface to check the results.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm363 
PMCID: PMC1933209
PMID: 17567614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Proteome Res. 2007 May;6(5):1917-32. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 3. Ligands, post-translational
modifications, and diseases associated with intrinsically disordered proteins.

Xie H(1), Vucetic S, Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Uversky 
VN.

Currently, the understanding of the relationships between function, amino acid
sequence, and protein structure continues to represent one of the major
challenges of the modern protein science. As many as 50% of eukaryotic proteins
are likely to contain functionally important long disordered regions. Many
proteins are wholly disordered but still possess numerous biologically important 
functions. However, the number of experimentally confirmed disordered proteins
with known biological functions is substantially smaller than their actual number
in nature. Therefore, there is a crucial need for novel bionformatics approaches 
that allow projection of the current knowledge from a few experimentally verified
examples to much larger groups of known and potential proteins. The elaboration
of a bioinformatics tool for the analysis of functional diversity of
intrinsically disordered proteins and application of this data mining tool to
>200 000 proteins from the Swiss-Prot database, each annotated with at least one 
of the 875 functional keywords, was described in the first paper of this series
(Xie, H.; Vucetic, S.; Iakoucheva, L. M.; Oldfield, C. J.; Dunker, A. K.;
Obradovic, Z.; Uversky, V.N. Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 1.
Biological processes and functions of proteins with long disordered regions. J.
Proteome Res. 2007, 5, 1882-1898). Using this tool, we have found that out of the
710 Swiss-Prot functional keywords associated with at least 20 proteins, 262 were
strongly positively correlated with long intrinsically disordered regions, and
302 were strongly negatively correlated. Illustrative examples of functional
disorder or order were found for the vast majority of keywords showing strongest 
positive or negative correlation with intrinsic disorder, respectively. Some 80
Swiss-Prot keywords associated with disorder- and order-driven biological
processes and protein functions were described in the first paper (see above).
The second paper of the series was devoted to the presentation of 87 Swiss-Prot
keywords attributed to the cellular components, domains, technical terms,
developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities possessing strong
positive and negative correlation with long disordered regions (Vucetic, S.; Xie,
H.; Iakoucheva, L. M.; Oldfield, C. J.; Dunker, A. K.; Obradovic, Z.; Uversky, V.
N. Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 2. Cellular components, domains,
technical terms, developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities
correlated with long disordered regions. J. Proteome Res. 2007, 5, 1899-1916).
Protein structure and functionality can be modulated by various
post-translational modifications or/and as a result of binding of specific
ligands. Numerous human diseases are associated with protein
misfolding/misassembly/misfunctioning. This work concludes the series of papers
dedicated to the functional anthology of intrinsic disorder and describes
approximately 80 Swiss-Prot functional keywords that are related to ligands,
post-translational modifications, and diseases possessing strong positive or
negative correlation with the predicted long disordered regions in proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/pr060394e 
PMCID: PMC2588348
PMID: 17391016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Proteome Res. 2007 May;6(5):1899-916. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 2. Cellular components, domains,
technical terms, developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities
correlated with long disordered regions.

Vucetic S(1), Xie H, Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Uversky 
VN.

Biologically active proteins without stable ordered structure (i.e.,
intrinsically disordered proteins) are attracting increased attention. Functional
repertoires of ordered and disordered proteins are very different, and the
ability to differentiate whether a given function is associated with intrinsic
disorder or with a well-folded protein is crucial for modern protein science.
However, there is a large gap between the number of proteins experimentally
confirmed to be disordered and their actual number in nature. As a result,
studies of functional properties of confirmed disordered proteins, while helpful 
in revealing the functional diversity of protein disorder, provide only a limited
view. To overcome this problem, a bioinformatics approach for comprehensive study
of functional roles of protein disorder was proposed in the first paper of this
series (Xie, H.; Vucetic, S.; Iakoucheva, L. M.; Oldfield, C. J.; Dunker, A. K.; 
Obradovic, Z.; Uversky, V. N. Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 1.
Biological processes and functions of proteins with long disordered regions. J.
Proteome Res. 2007, 5, 1882-1898). Applying this novel approach to Swiss-Prot
sequences and functional keywords, we found over 238 and 302 keywords to be
strongly positively or negatively correlated, respectively, with long
intrinsically disordered regions. This paper describes approximately 90
Swiss-Prot keywords attributed to the cellular components, domains, technical
terms, developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities possessing strong
positive and negative correlation with long disordered regions.

DOI: 10.1021/pr060393m 
PMCID: PMC2588346
PMID: 17391015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Proteome Res. 2007 May;6(5):1882-98. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 1. Biological processes and functions
of proteins with long disordered regions.

Xie H(1), Vucetic S, Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Uversky VN, Obradovic
Z.

Identifying relationships between function, amino acid sequence, and protein
structure represents a major challenge. In this study, we propose a
bioinformatics approach that identifies functional keywords in the Swiss-Prot
database that correlate with intrinsic disorder. A statistical evaluation is
employed to rank the significance of these correlations. Protein sequence data
redundancy and the relationship between protein length and protein structure were
taken into consideration to ensure the quality of the statistical inferences.
Over 200,000 proteins from the Swiss-Prot database were analyzed using this
approach. The predictions of intrinsic disorder were carried out using PONDR VL3E
predictor of long disordered regions that achieves an accuracy of above 86%.
Overall, out of the 710 Swiss-Prot functional keywords that were each associated 
with at least 20 proteins, 238 were found to be strongly positively correlated
with predicted long intrinsically disordered regions, whereas 302 were strongly
negatively correlated with such regions. The remaining 170 keywords were
ambiguous without strong positive or negative correlation with the disorder
predictions. These functions cover a large variety of biological activities and
imply that disordered regions are characterized by a wide functional repertoire. 
Our results agree well with literature findings, as we were able to find at least
one illustrative example of functional disorder or order shown experimentally for
the vast majority of keywords showing the strongest positive or negative
correlation with intrinsic disorder. This work opens a series of three papers,
which enriches the current view of protein structure-function relationships,
especially with regards to functionalities of intrinsically disordered proteins, 
and provides researchers with a novel tool that could be used to improve the
understanding of the relationships between protein structure and function. The
first paper of the series describes our statistical approach, outlines the major 
findings, and provides illustrative examples of biological processes and
functions positively and negatively correlated with intrinsic disorder.

DOI: 10.1021/pr060392u 
PMCID: PMC2543138
PMID: 17391014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2007 Apr;8(2):135-49.

Predicting protein disorder and induced folding: from theoretical principles to
practical applications.

Bourhis JM(1), Canard B, Longhi S.

In the last years there has been an increasing amount of experimental evidence
pointing out that a large number of proteins are either fully or partially
disordered (unstructured). Intrinsically disordered proteins are ubiquitary
proteins that fulfil essential biological functions while lacking highly
populated and uniform secondary and tertiary structure under physiological
conditions. Despite the large abundance of disorder, disordered regions are still
poorly detected. Recognition of disordered regions in a protein is instrumental
for reducing spurious sequence similarity between disordered regions and ordered 
ones, and for delineating boundaries of protein domains amenable to
crystallization. As presently none of the available automated methods for
prediction of protein disorder can be taken as fully reliable on its own, we
present a brief overview of the methods currently employed highlighting their
philosophy. We show a few practical examples of how they can be combined to avoid
pitfalls and to achieve more reliable predictions. We also describe the currently
available methods for the identification of regions involved in induced folding
and provide a few practical examples in which the accuracy of predictions was
experimentally confirmed.


PMID: 17430195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 Mar 6;8:78.

Predicting mostly disordered proteins by using structure-unknown protein data.

Shimizu K(1), Muraoka Y, Hirose S, Tomii K, Noguchi T.

BACKGROUND: Predicting intrinsically disordered proteins is important in
structural biology because they are thought to carry out various cellular
functions even though they have no stable three-dimensional structure. We know
the structures of far more ordered proteins than disordered proteins. The
structural distribution of proteins in nature can therefore be inferred to differ
from that of proteins whose structures have been determined experimentally. We
know many more protein sequences than we do protein structures, and many of the
known sequences can be expected to be those of disordered proteins. Thus it would
be efficient to use the information of structure-unknown proteins in order to
avoid training data sparseness. We propose a novel method for predicting which
proteins are mostly disordered by using spectral graph transducer and training
with a huge amount of structure-unknown sequences as well as structure-known
sequences.
RESULTS: When the proposed method was evaluated on data that included 82
disordered proteins and 526 ordered proteins, its sensitivity was 0.723 and its
specificity was 0.977. It resulted in a Matthews correlation coefficient 0.202
points higher than that obtained using FoldIndex, 0.221 points higher than that
obtained using the method based on plotting hydrophobicity against the number of 
contacts and 0.07 points higher than that obtained using support vector machines 
(SVMs). To examine robustness against training data sparseness, we investigated
the correlation between two results obtained when the method was trained on
different datasets and tested on the same dataset. The correlation coefficient
for the proposed method is 0.14 higher than that for the method using SVMs. When 
the proposed SGT-based method was compared with four per-residue predictors (VL3,
GlobPlot, DISOPRED2 and IUPred (long)), its sensitivity was 0.834 for disordered 
proteins, which is 0.052-0.523 higher than that of the per-residue predictors,
and its specificity was 0.991 for ordered proteins, which is 0.036-0.153 higher
than that of the per-residue predictors. The proposed method was also evaluated
on data that included 417 partially disordered proteins. It predicted the
frequency of disordered proteins to be 1.95% for the proteins with 5%-10%
disordered sequences, 1.46% for the proteins with 10%-20% disordered sequences
and 16.57% for proteins with 20%-40% disordered sequences.
CONCLUSION: The proposed method, which utilizes the information of
structure-unknown data, predicts disordered proteins more accurately than other
methods and is less affected by training data sparseness.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-78 
PMCID: PMC1838436
PMID: 17338828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biophys J. 2007 Mar 1;92(5):1439-56. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

Intrinsic disorder and functional proteomics.

Radivojac P(1), Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Obradovic Z, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

The recent advances in the prediction of intrinsically disordered proteins and
the use of protein disorder prediction in the fields of molecular biology and
bioinformatics are reviewed here, especially with regard to protein function.
First, a close look is taken at intrinsically disordered proteins and then at the
methods used for their experimental characterization. Next, the major statistical
properties of disordered regions are summarized, and prediction models developed 
thus far are described, including their numerous applications in functional
proteomics. The future of the prediction of protein disorder and the future uses 
of such predictions in functional proteomics comprise the last section of this
article.

DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.106.094045 
PMCID: PMC1796814
PMID: 17158572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2007 Feb;24(4):325-42.

Intrinsic disorder in the Protein Data Bank.

Le Gall T(1), Romero PR, Cortese MS, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

The Protein Data Bank (PDB) is the preeminent source of protein structural
information. PDB contains over 32,500 experimentally determined 3-D structures
solved using X-ray crystallography or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
Intrinsically disordered regions fail to form a fixed 3-D structure under
physiological conditions. In this study, we compare the amino-acid sequences of
proteins whose structures are determined by X-ray crystallography with the
corresponding sequences from the Swiss-Prot database. The analyzed dataset
includes 16,370 structures, which represent 18,101 PDB chains and 5,434 different
proteins from 910 different organisms (2,793 eukaryotic, 2,109 bacterial, 288
viral, and 244 archaeal). In this dataset, on average, each Swiss-Prot protein is
represented by 7 PDB chains with 76% of the crystallized regions being
represented by more than one structure. Intriguingly, the complete sequences of
only approximately 7% of proteins are observed in the corresponding PDB
structures, and only approximately 25% of the total dataset have >95% of their
lengths observed in the corresponding PDB structures. This suggests that the vast
majority of PDB proteins is shorter than their corresponding Swiss-Prot sequences
and/or contain numerous residues, which are not observed in maps of electron
density. To determine the prevalence of disordered regions in PDB, the residues
in the Swiss-Prot sequences were grouped into four general categories, "Observed"
(which correspond to structured regions), "Not observed" (regions with missing
electron density, potentially disordered), "Uncharacterized," and "Ambiguous,"
depending on their appearance in the corresponding PDB entries. This
non-redundant set of residues can be viewed as a 'fragment' or empirical domain
database that contains a set of experimentally determined structured regions or
domains and a set of experimentally verified disordered regions or domains. We
studied the propensities and properties of residues in these four categories and 
analyzed their relations to the predictions of disorder using several algorithms.
"Non-observed," "Ambiguous," and "Uncharacterized" regions were shown to possess 
the amino acid compositional biases typical of intrinsically disordered proteins.
The application of four different disorder predictors (PONDR(R) VL-XT, VL3-BA,
VSL1P, and IUPred) revealed that the vast majority of residues in the "Observed" 
dataset are ordered, and that the "Not observed" regions are mostly disordered.
The "Uncharacterized" regions possess some tendency toward order, whereas the
predictions for the short "Ambiguous" regions are really ambiguous. Long
"Ambiguous" regions (>70 amino acid residues) are mostly predicted to be ordered,
suggesting that they are likely to be "wobbly" domains. Overall, we showed that
completely ordered proteins are not highly abundant in PDB and many PDB sequences
have disordered regions. In fact, in the analyzed dataset approximately 10% of
the PDB proteins contain regions of consecutive missing or ambiguous residues
longer than 30 amino-acids and approximately 40% of the proteins possess short
regions (> or =10 and < 30 amino-acid long) of missing and ambiguous residues.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2007.10507123 
PMID: 17206849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Methods Mol Biol. 2007;408:69-92.

Prediction of intrinsic disorder and its use in functional proteomics.

Uversky VN(1), Radivojac P, Iakoucheva LM, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK.

The number of experimentally verified, intrinsically disordered (ID) proteins is 
rapidly rising. Research is often focused on a structural characterization of a
given protein, looking for several key features. However, ID proteins with their 
dynamic structures that interconvert on a number of time-scales are difficult
targets for the majority of traditional biophysical and biochemical techniques.
Structural and functional analyses of these proteins can be significantly aided
by disorder predictions. The current advances in the prediction of ID proteins
and the use of protein disorder prediction in the fields of molecular biology and
bioinformatics are briefly overviewed herein. A method is provided to utilize
intrinsic disorder knowledge to gain structural and functional information
related to individual proteins, protein groups, families, classes, and even
entire proteomes.


PMID: 18314578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007 Jan;35(Database issue):D786-93. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

DisProt: the Database of Disordered Proteins.

Sickmeier M(1), Hamilton JA, LeGall T, Vacic V, Cortese MS, Tantos A, Szabo B,
Tompa P, Chen J, Uversky VN, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK.

The Database of Protein Disorder (DisProt) links structure and function
information for intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). Intrinsically
disordered proteins do not form a fixed three-dimensional structure under
physiological conditions, either in their entireties or in segments or regions.
We define IDP as a protein that contains at least one experimentally determined
disordered region. Although lacking fixed structure, IDPs and regions carry out
important biological functions, being typically involved in regulation, signaling
and control. Such functions can involve high-specificity low-affinity
interactions, the multiple binding of one protein to many partners and the
multiple binding of many proteins to one partner. These three features are all
enabled and enhanced by protein intrinsic disorder. One of the major hindrances
in the study of IDPs has been the lack of organized information. DisProt was
developed to enable IDP research by collecting and organizing knowledge regarding
the experimental characterization and the functional associations of IDPs. In
addition to being a unique source of biological information, DisProt opens doors 
for a plethora of bioinformatics studies. DisProt is openly available at
http://www.disprot.org.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkl893 
PMCID: PMC1751543
PMID: 17145717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Proteins. 2007;69 Suppl 8:129-36.

Assessment of disorder predictions in CASP7.

Bordoli L(1), Kiefer F, Schwede T.

Intrinsically unstructured regions in proteins have been associated with numerous
important biological cellular functions. As measuring native disorder
experimentally is technically challenging, computational methods for prediction
of disordered regions in a protein have gained much interest in recent years. As 
part of the seventh Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure
Prediction (CASP7), we have assessed 19 methods for disorder prediction based on 
their results for 96 target proteins. Prediction accuracy was assessed using
detailed numerical comparison between the predicted disorder and the experimental
structures. On average, methods participating in CASP7 have improved accuracy in 
comparison to the previous assessment in CASP6. Overall, however, no improvement 
over the best methods in CASP6 was observed in CASP7. Significant differences
between different prediction methods were identified with regard to their
sensitivity and specificity in correctly predicting ordered and disordered
residues based on a protein target sequence, which is of relevance for practical 
applications of these computational tools.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.21671 
PMID: 17680688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Proteins. 2007 Jan 1;66(1):16-28.

Insights into protein structure and function from disorder-complexity space.

Weathers EA(1), Paulaitis ME, Woolf TB, Hoh JH.

Intrinsically disordered proteins have a wide variety of important functional
roles. However, the relationship between sequence and function in these proteins 
is significantly different than that for well-folded proteins. In a previous
work, we showed that the propensity to be disordered can be recognized based on
sequence composition alone. Here that analysis is furthered by examining the
relationship of disorder propensity to sequence complexity, where the metrics for
these two properties depend only on composition. The distributions of 40 amino
acid peptides from both ordered and disordered proteins are graphed in this
disorder-complexity space. An analysis of Swiss-Prot shows that most peptides
have high complexity and relatively low disorder. However, there are also an
appreciable number of low complexity-high disorder peptides in the database. In
contrast, there are no low complexity-low disorder peptides. A similar analysis
for peptides in the PDB reveals a much narrower distribution, with few peptides
of low complexity and high disorder. In this case, the bounds of the
disorder-complexity distribution are well defined and might be used to evaluate
the likelihood that a peptide can be crystallized with current methods. The
disorder-complexity distributions of individual proteins and sets of proteins
grouped by function are also examined. Among individual proteins, there is an
enormous variety of distributions that in some cases can be rationalized with
regard to function. Groups of functionally related proteins are found to have
distributions that are similar within each group but show notable differences
between groups. Finally, a pattern matching algorithm is used to search for
proteins with particular disorder-complexity distributions. The results suggest
that this approach might be used to identify relationships between otherwise
dissimilar proteins.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.21055 
PMID: 17044059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Mol Biol. 2006 Oct 6;362(5):1043-59. Epub 2006 Aug 4.

Analysis of molecular recognition features (MoRFs).

Mohan A(1), Oldfield CJ, Radivojac P, Vacic V, Cortese MS, Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

Several proteomic studies in the last decade revealed that many proteins are
either completely disordered or possess long structurally flexible regions. Many 
such regions were shown to be of functional importance, often allowing a protein 
to interact with a large number of diverse partners. Parallel to these findings, 
during the last five years structural bioinformatics has produced an explosion of
results regarding protein-protein interactions and their importance for cell
signaling. We studied the occurrence of relatively short (10-70 residues),
loosely structured protein regions within longer, largely disordered sequences
that were characterized as bound to larger proteins. We call these regions
molecular recognition features (MoRFs, also known as molecular recognition
elements, MoREs). Interestingly, upon binding to their partner(s), MoRFs undergo 
disorder-to-order transitions. Thus, in our interpretation, MoRFs represent a
class of disordered region that exhibits molecular recognition and binding
functions. This work extends previous research showing the importance of
flexibility and disorder for molecular recognition. We describe the development
of a database of MoRFs derived from the RCSB Protein Data Bank and present
preliminary results of bioinformatics analyses of these sequences. Based on the
structure adopted upon binding, at least three basic types of MoRFs are found:
alpha-MoRFs, beta-MoRFs, and iota-MoRFs, which form alpha-helices, beta-strands, 
and irregular secondary structure when bound, respectively. Our data suggest that
functionally significant residual structure can exist in MoRF regions prior to
the actual binding event. The contribution of intrinsic protein disorder to the
nature and function of MoRFs has also been addressed. The results of this study
will advance the understanding of protein-protein interactions and help towards
the future development of useful protein-protein binding site predictors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.07.087 
PMID: 16935303  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Biochemistry. 2006 Sep 5;45(35):10448-60.

Abundance of intrinsic disorder in protein associated with cardiovascular
disease.

Cheng Y(1), LeGall T, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

Evidence that many protein regions and even entire proteins lacking stable
tertiary and/or secondary structure in solution (i.e., intrinsically disordered
proteins) might be involved in protein-protein interactions, regulation,
recognition, and signal transduction is rapidly accumulating. These signaling
proteins play a crucial role in the development of several pathological
conditions, including cancer. To test a hypothesis that intrinsic disorder is
also abundant in cardiovascular disease (CVD), a data set of 487 CVD-related
proteins was extracted from SWISS-PROT. CVD-related proteins are depleted in
major order-promoting residues (Trp, Phe, Tyr, Ile, and Val) and enriched in some
disorder-promoting residues (Arg, Gln, Ser, Pro, and Glu). The application of a
neural network predictor of natural disordered regions (PONDR VL-XT) together
with cumulative distribution function (CDF) analysis, charge-hydropathy plot (CH 
plot) analysis, and alpha-helical molecular recognition feature (alpha-MoRF)
indicator revealed that CVD-related proteins are enriched in intrinsic disorder. 
In fact, the percentage of proteins with 30 or more consecutive residues
predicted by PONDR VL-XT to be disordered was 57 +/- 4% for CVD-associated
proteins. This value is close that described earlier for signaling proteins (66
+/- 6%) and is significantly larger than the content of intrinsic disorder in
eukaryotic proteins from SWISS-PROT (47 +/- 4%) and in nonhomologous protein
segments with a well-defined three-dimensional structure (13 +/- 4%).
Furthermore, CDF and CH-plot analyses revealed that 120 and 36 CVD-related
proteins, respectively, are wholly disordered. This high level of intrinsic
disorder could be important for the function of CVD-related proteins and for the 
control and regulation of processes associated with cardiovascular disease. In
agreement with this hypothesis, 198 alpha-MoRFs were predicted in 101 proteins
from the CVD data set. A comparison of disorder predictions with the experimental
structural and functional data for a subset of the CVD-associated proteins
indicated good agreement between predictions and observations. Thus, our data
suggest that intrinsically disordered proteins might play key roles in
cardiovascular disease.

DOI: 10.1021/bi060981d 
PMID: 16939197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Proteome Res. 2006 Aug;5(8):1829-42.

Protein intrinsic disorder and human papillomaviruses: increased amount of
disorder in E6 and E7 oncoproteins from high risk HPVs.

Uversky VN(1), Roman A, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK.

It is recognized now that many functional proteins or their long segments are
devoid of stable secondary and/or tertiary structure and exist instead as very
dynamic ensembles of conformations. They are known by different names including
natively unfolded, intrinsically disordered, intrinsically unstructured,
rheomorphic, pliable, and different combinations thereof. Many important
functions and activities have been associated with these intrinsically disordered
proteins (IDPs), including molecular recognition, signaling, and regulation. It
is also believed that disorder of these proteins allows function to be readily
modified through phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiquitination, hydroxylation, and
proteolysis. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that IDPs comprise a large fraction
of different proteomes. Furthermore, it is established that the intrinsic
disorder is relatively abundant among cancer-related and other disease-related
proteins and IDPs play a number of key roles in oncogenesis. There are more than 
100 different types of human papillomaviruses (HPVs), which are the causative
agents of benign papillomas/warts, and cofactors in the development of carcinomas
of the genital tract, head and neck, and epidermis. With respect to their
association with cancer, HPVs are grouped into two classes, known as low (e.g.,
HPV-6 and HPV-11) and high-risk (e.g., HPV-16 and HPV-18) types. The entire
proteome of HPV includes six nonstructural proteins [E1, E2, E4, E5, E6, and E7
(the latter two are known to function as oncoproteins in the high-risk HPVs)] and
two structural proteins (L1 and L2). To understand whether intrinsic disorder
plays a role in the oncogenic potential of different HPV types, we have performed
a detailed bioinformatics analysis of proteomes of high-risk and low-risk HPVs
with the major focus on E6 and E7 oncoproteins. The results of this analysis are 
consistent with the conclusion that high-risk HPVs are characterized by the
increased amount of intrinsic disorder in transforming proteins E6 and E7.

DOI: 10.1021/pr0602388 
PMID: 16889404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biochemistry. 2006 Jun 6;45(22):6873-88.

Intrinsic disorder in transcription factors.

Liu J(1), Perumal NB, Oldfield CJ, Su EW, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Intrinsic disorder (ID) is highly abundant in eukaryotes, which reflect the
greater need for disorder-associated signaling and transcriptional regulation in 
nucleated cells. Although several well-characterized examples of intrinsically
disordered proteins in transcriptional regulation have been reported, no
systematic analysis has been reported so far. To test for the general prevalence 
of intrinsic disorder in transcriptional regulation, we used the predictor of
natural disorder regions (PONDR) to analyze the abundance of intrinsic disorder
in three transcription factor datasets and two control sets. This analysis
revealed that from 94.13 to 82.63% of transcription factors possess extended
regions of intrinsic disorder, relative to 54.51 and 18.64% of the proteins in
two control datasets, which indicates the significant prevalence of intrinsic
disorder in transcription factors. This propensity of transcription factors to
intrinsic disorder was confirmed by cumulative distribution function analysis and
charge-hydropathy plots. The amino acid composition analysis showed that all
three transcription factor datasets were substantially depleted in
order-promoting residues and significantly enriched in disorder-promoting
residues. Our analysis of the distribution of disorder within the transcription
factor datasets revealed that (a) the AT-hooks and basic regions of transcription
factor DNA-binding domains are highly disordered; (b) the degree of disorder in
transcription factor activation regions is much higher than that in DNA-binding
domains; (c) the degree of disorder is significantly higher in eukaryotic
transcription factors than in prokaryotic transcription factors; and (d) the
level of alpha-MoRF (molecular recognition feature) prediction is much higher in 
transcription factors. Overall, our data reflected the fact that eukaryotes with 
well-developed gene transcription machinery require transcription factor
flexibility to be more efficient.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0602718 
PMCID: PMC2538555
PMID: 16734424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 May 30;103(22):8390-5. Epub 2006 May 22.

Alternative splicing in concert with protein intrinsic disorder enables increased
functional diversity in multicellular organisms.

Romero PR(1), Zaidi S, Fang YY, Uversky VN, Radivojac P, Oldfield CJ, Cortese MS,
Sickmeier M, LeGall T, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK.

Alternative splicing of pre-mRNA generates two or more protein isoforms from a
single gene, thereby contributing to protein diversity. Despite intensive
efforts, an understanding of the protein structure-function implications of
alternative splicing is still lacking. Intrinsic disorder, which is a lack of
equilibrium 3D structure under physiological conditions, may provide this
understanding. Intrinsic disorder is a common phenomenon, particularly in
multicellular eukaryotes, and is responsible for important protein functions
including regulation and signaling. We hypothesize that polypeptide segments
affected by alternative splicing are most often intrinsically disordered such
that alternative splicing enables functional and regulatory diversity while
avoiding structural complications. We analyzed a set of 46 differentially spliced
genes encoding experimentally characterized human proteins containing both
structured and intrinsically disordered amino acid segments. We show that 81% of 
75 alternatively spliced fragments in these proteins were associated with fully
(57%) or partially (24%) disordered protein regions. Regions affected by
alternative splicing were significantly biased toward encoding disordered
residues, with a vanishingly small P value. A larger data set composed of 558
SwissProt proteins with known isoforms produced by 1,266 alternatively spliced
fragments was characterized by applying the pondr vsl1 disorder predictor.
Results from prediction data are consistent with those obtained from experimental
data, further supporting the proposed hypothesis. Associating alternative
splicing with protein disorder enables the time- and tissue-specific modulation
of protein function needed for cell differentiation and the evolution of
multicellular organisms.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0507916103 
PMCID: PMC1482503
PMID: 16717195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Apr 17;7:208.

Length-dependent prediction of protein intrinsic disorder.

Peng K(1), Radivojac P, Vucetic S, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z.

BACKGROUND: Due to the functional importance of intrinsically disordered proteins
or protein regions, prediction of intrinsic protein disorder from amino acid
sequence has become an area of active research as witnessed in the 6th experiment
on Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP6).
Since the initial work by Romero et al. (Identifying disordered regions in
proteins from amino acid sequences, IEEE Int. Conf. Neural Netw., 1997), our
group has developed several predictors optimized for long disordered regions (>30
residues) with prediction accuracy exceeding 85%. However, these predictors are
less successful on short disordered regions (< or =30 residues). A probable cause
is a length-dependent amino acid compositions and sequence properties of
disordered regions.
RESULTS: We proposed two new predictor models, VSL2-M1 and VSL2-M2, to address
this length-dependency problem in prediction of intrinsic protein disorder. These
two predictors are similar to the original VSL1 predictor used in the CASP6
experiment. In both models, two specialized predictors were first built and
optimized for short (< or = 30 residues) and long disordered regions (>30
residues), respectively. A meta predictor was then trained to integrate the
specialized predictors into the final predictor model. As the 10-fold
cross-validation results showed, the VSL2 predictors achieved well-balanced
prediction accuracies of 81% on both short and long disordered regions.
Comparisons over the VSL2 training dataset via 10-fold cross-validation and a
blind-test set of unrelated recent PDB chains indicated that VSL2 predictors were
significantly more accurate than several existing predictors of intrinsic protein
disorder.
CONCLUSION: The VSL2 predictors are applicable to disordered regions of any
length and can accurately identify the short disordered regions that are often
misclassified by our previous disorder predictors. The success of the VSL2
predictors further confirmed the previously observed differences in amino acid
compositions and sequence properties between short and long disordered regions,
and justified our approaches for modelling short and long disordered regions
separately. The VSL2 predictors are freely accessible for non-commercial use at
http://www.ist.temple.edu/disprot/predictorVSL2.php.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-7-208 
PMCID: PMC1479845
PMID: 16618368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Proteome Res. 2006 Apr;5(4):888-98.

Conservation of intrinsic disorder in protein domains and families: II. functions
of conserved disorder.

Chen JW(1), Romero P, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Regions of conserved disorder prediction (CDP) were found in protein domains from
all available InterPro member databases, although with varying frequency. These
CDP regions were found in proteins from all kingdoms of life, including viruses. 
However, eukaryotes had 1 order of magnitude more proteins containing long
disordered regions than did archaea and bacteria. Sequence conservation in CDP
regions varied, but was on average slightly lower than in regions of conserved
order. In some cases, disordered regions evolve faster than ordered regions, in
others they evolve slower, and in the rest they evolve at roughly the same rate. 
A variety of functions were found to be associated with domains containing
conserved disorder. The most common were DNA/RNA binding, and protein binding.
Many ribosomal proteins also were found to contain conserved disordered regions. 
Other functions identified included membrane translocation and amino acid storage
for germination. Due to limitations of current knowledge as well as the
methodology used for this work, it was not determined whether these functions
were directly associated with the predicted disordered region. However, the
functions associated with conserved disorder in this work are in agreement with
the functions found in other studies to correlate to disordered regions. We have 
established that intrinsic disorder may be more common in bacterial and archaeal 
proteins than previously thought, but this disorder is likely to be used for
different purposes than in eukaryotic proteins, as well as occurring in shorter
stretches of protein. Regions of predicted disorder were found to be conserved
within a large number of protein families and domains. Although many think of
such conserved domains as being ordered, in fact a significant number of them
contain regions of disorder that are likely to be crucial to their functions.

DOI: 10.1021/pr060049p 
PMCID: PMC2533134
PMID: 16602696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Proteome Res. 2006 Apr;5(4):879-87.

Conservation of intrinsic disorder in protein domains and families: I. A database
of conserved predicted disordered regions.

Chen JW(1), Romero P, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Many protein regions have been shown to be intrinsically disordered, lacking
unique structure under physiological conditions. These intrinsically disordered
regions are not only very common in proteomes, but also crucial to the function
of many proteins, especially those involved in signaling, recognition, and
regulation. The goal of this work was to identify the prevalence,
characteristics, and functions of conserved disordered regions within protein
domains and families. A database was created to store the amino acid sequences of
nearly one million proteins and their domain matches from the InterPro database, 
a resource integrating eight different protein family and domain databases.
Disorder prediction was performed on these protein sequences. Regions of sequence
corresponding to domains were aligned using a multiple sequence alignment tool.
From this initial information, regions of conserved predicted disorder were found
within the domains. The methodology for this search consisted of finding regions 
of consecutive positions in the multiple sequence alignments in which a 90% or
more of the sequences were predicted to be disordered. This procedure was
constrained to find such regions of conserved disorder prediction that were at
least 20 amino acids in length. The results of this work included 3,653 regions
of conserved disorder prediction, found within 2,898 distinct InterPro entries.
Most regions of conserved predicted disorder detected were short, with less than 
10% of those found exceeding 30 residues in length.

DOI: 10.1021/pr060048x 
PMCID: PMC2543136
PMID: 16602695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Jan 12;7:16.

Automatic discovery of cross-family sequence features associated with protein
function.

Brameier M(1), Haan J, Krings A, MacCallum RM.

BACKGROUND: Methods for predicting protein function directly from amino acid
sequences are useful tools in the study of uncharacterized protein families and
in comparative genomics. Until now, this problem has been approached using
machine learning techniques that attempt to predict membership, or otherwise, to 
predefined functional categories or subcellular locations. A potential drawback
of this approach is that the human-designated functional classes may not
accurately reflect the underlying biology, and consequently important
sequence-to-function relationships may be missed.
RESULTS: We show that a self-supervised data mining approach is able to find
relationships between sequence features and functional annotations. No
preconceived ideas about functional categories are required, and the training
data is simply a set of protein sequences and their UniProt/Swiss-Prot
annotations. The main technical aspect of the approach is the co-evolution of
amino acid-based regular expressions and keyword-based logical expressions with
genetic programming. Our experiments on a strictly non-redundant set of
eukaryotic proteins reveal that the strongest and most easily detected
sequence-to-function relationships are concerned with targeting to various
cellular compartments, which is an area already well studied both experimentally 
and computationally. Of more interest are a number of broad functional roles
which can also be correlated with sequence features. These include inhibition,
biosynthesis, transcription and defence against bacteria. Despite substantial
overlaps between these functions and their corresponding cellular compartments,
we find clear differences in the sequence motifs used to predict some of these
functions. For example, the presence of polyglutamine repeats appears to be
linked more strongly to the "transcription" function than to the general
"nuclear" function/location.
CONCLUSION: We have developed a novel and useful approach for knowledge discovery
in annotated sequence data. The technique is able to identify functionally
important sequence features and does not require expert knowledge. By viewing
protein function from a sequence perspective, the approach is also suitable for
discovering unexpected links between biological processes, such as the recently
discovered role of ubiquitination in transcription.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-7-16 
PMCID: PMC1395344
PMID: 16409628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Proteins. 2005 May 15;59(3):444-53.

Addressing the intrinsic disorder bottleneck in structural proteomics.

Oldfield CJ(1), Ulrich EL, Cheng Y, Dunker AK, Markley JL.

The Center for Eukaryotic Structural Genomics (CESG), as part of the Protein
Structure Initiative (PSI), has established a high-throughput structure
determination pipeline focused on eukaryotic proteins. NMR spectroscopy is an
integral part of this pipeline, both as a method for structure determinations and
as a means for screening proteins for stable structure. Because computational
approaches have estimated that many eukaryotic proteins are highly disordered,
about 1 year into the project, CESG began to use an algorithm (the Predictor of
Naturally Disordered Regions, PONDR to avoid proteins that were likely to be
disordered. We report a retrospective analysis of the effect of this filtering on
the yield of viable structure determination candidates. In addition, we have used
our current database of results on 70 protein targets from Arabidopsis thaliana
and 1 from Caenorhabditis elegans, which were labeled uniformly with nitrogen-15 
and screened for disorder by NMR spectroscopy, to compare the original algorithm 
with 13 other approaches for predicting disorder from sequence. Our study
indicates that the efficiency of structural proteomics of eukaryotes can be
improved significantly by removing targets predicted to be disordered by an
algorithm chosen to provide optimal performance.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.20446 
PMID: 15789434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2005 Feb;3(1):35-60.

Optimizing long intrinsic disorder predictors with protein evolutionary
information.

Peng K(1), Vucetic S, Radivojac P, Brown CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z.

Protein existing as an ensemble of structures, called intrinsically disordered,
has been shown to be responsible for a wide variety of biological functions and
to be common in nature. Here we focus on improving sequence-based predictions of 
long (>30 amino acid residues) regions lacking specific 3-D structure by means of
four new neural-network-based Predictors Of Natural Disordered Regions (PONDRs): 
VL3, VL3H, VL3P, and VL3E. PONDR VL3 used several features from a previously
introduced PONDR VL2, but benefitted from optimized predictor models and a
slightly larger (152 vs. 145) set of disordered proteins that were cleaned of
mislabeling errors found in the smaller set. PONDR VL3H utilized homologues of
the disordered proteins in the training stage, while PONDR VL3P used attributes
derived from sequence profiles obtained by PSI-BLAST searches. The measure of
accuracy was the average between accuracies on disordered and ordered protein
regions. By this measure, the 30-fold cross-validation accuracies of VL3, VL3H,
and VL3P were, respectively, 83.6 +/- 1.4%, 85.3 +/- 1.4%, and 85.2 +/- 1.5%. By 
combining VL3H and VL3P, the resulting PONDR VL3E achieved an accuracy of 86.7
+/- 1.4%. This is a significant improvement over our previous PONDRs VLXT (71.6
+/- 1.3%) and VL2 (80.9 +/- 1.4%). The new disorder predictors with the
corresponding datasets are freely accessible through the web server at
http://www.ist.temple.edu/disprot.


PMID: 15751111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Proteins. 2005;61 Suppl 7:167-75.

Assessment of disorder predictions in CASP6.

Jin Y(1), Dunbrack RL Jr.

Natively disordered proteins or protein segments are those without stable
secondary or tertiary structure in the absence of binding partners. Such
disordered regions often are important functional sites in many biological
processes, especially those involved in transcription, translation, and cell
signaling. The prediction of such regions is therefore of great importance in
focusing experimental efforts on regions of proteins that may be critical for
function. In CASP6, held in 2004, twenty research groups participated in the
prediction of disordered regions. Both binary predictions (ordered or disordered)
and assigned scores for disorder were assessed. Several groups performed quite
well in predicting regions of disorder in the X-ray and NMR structures available 
to the assessors. The best of these groups performed better than the best groups 
in CASP5, held in 2002.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.20734 
PMID: 16187359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 11;32(3):1037-49. Print 2004.

The importance of intrinsic disorder for protein phosphorylation.

Iakoucheva LM(1), Radivojac P, Brown CJ, O'Connor TR, Sikes JG, Obradovic Z,
Dunker AK.

Reversible protein phosphorylation provides a major regulatory mechanism in
eukaryotic cells. Due to the high variability of amino acid residues flanking a
relatively limited number of experimentally identified phosphorylation sites,
reliable prediction of such sites still remains an important issue. Here we
report the development of a new web-based tool for the prediction of protein
phosphorylation sites, DISPHOS (DISorder-enhanced PHOSphorylation predictor,
http://www.ist.temple. edu/DISPHOS). We observed that amino acid compositions,
sequence complexity, hydrophobicity, charge and other sequence attributes of
regions adjacent to phosphorylation sites are very similar to those of
intrinsically disordered protein regions. Thus, DISPHOS uses position-specific
amino acid frequencies and disorder information to improve the discrimination
between phosphorylation and non-phosphorylation sites. Based on the estimates of 
phosphorylation rates in various protein categories, the outputs of DISPHOS are
adjusted in order to reduce the total number of misclassified residues. When
tested on an equal number of phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated residues, the 
accuracy of DISPHOS reaches 76% for serine, 81% for threonine and 83% for
tyrosine. The significant enrichment in disorder-promoting residues surrounding
phosphorylation sites together with the results obtained by applying DISPHOS to
various protein functional classes and proteomes, provide strong support for the 
hypothesis that protein phosphorylation predominantly occurs within intrinsically
disordered protein regions.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh253 
PMCID: PMC373391
PMID: 14960716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Appl Bioinformatics. 2004;3(2-3):105-13.

Natively disordered proteins: functions and predictions.

Romero P(1), Obradovic Z, Dunker AK.

Proteins can exist in at least three forms: the ordered form (solid-like), the
partially folded form (collapsed, molten globule-like or liquid-like) and the
extended form (extended, random coil-like or gas-like). The protein trinity
hypothesis has two components: (i) a given native protein can be in any one of
the three forms, depending on the sequence and the environment; and (ii) function
can arise from any one of the three forms or from transitions between them. In
this study, bioinformatics and data mining were used to investigate intrinsic
disorder in proteins and develop neural network-based predictors of natural
disordered regions (PONDR) that can discriminate between ordered and disordered
residues with up to 84% accuracy. Predictions of intrinsic disorder indicate that
the three kingdoms follow the disorder ranking eubacteria < archaebacteria <<
eukaryotes, with approximately half of eukaryotic proteins predicted to contain
substantial regions of intrinsic disorder. Many of the known disordered regions
are involved in signalling, regulation or control. Involvement of highly flexible
or disordered regions in signalling is logical: a flexible sensor more readily
undergoes conformational change in response to environmental perturbations than
does a rigid one. Thus, the increased disorder in the eukaryotes is likely the
direct result of an increased need for signalling and regulation in nucleated
organisms. PONDR can also be used to detect molecular recognition elements that
are disordered in the unbound state and become structured when bound to a
biologically meaningful partner. Application of disorder predictions to
cell-signalling, cancer-associated and control protein databases supports the
widespread occurrence of protein disorder in these processes.


PMID: 15693736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Protein Sci. 2004 Jan;13(1):71-80.

Protein flexibility and intrinsic disorder.

Radivojac P(1), Obradovic Z, Smith DK, Zhu G, Vucetic S, Brown CJ, Lawson JD,
Dunker AK.

Comparisons were made among four categories of protein flexibility: (1)
low-B-factor ordered regions, (2) high-B-factor ordered regions, (3) short
disordered regions, and (4) long disordered regions. Amino acid compositions of
the four categories were found to be significantly different from each other,
with high-B-factor ordered and short disordered regions being the most similar
pair. The high-B-factor (flexible) ordered regions are characterized by a higher 
average flexibility index, higher average hydrophilicity, higher average absolute
net charge, and higher total charge than disordered regions. The low-B-factor
regions are significantly enriched in hydrophobic residues and depleted in the
total number of charged residues compared to the other three categories. We
examined the predictability of the high-B-factor regions and developed a
predictor that discriminates between regions of low and high B-factors. This
predictor achieved an accuracy of 70% and a correlation of 0.43 with experimental
data, outperforming the 64% accuracy and 0.32 correlation of predictors based
solely on flexibility indices. To further clarify the differences between short
disordered regions and ordered regions, a predictor of short disordered regions
was developed. Its relatively high accuracy of 81% indicates considerable
differences between ordered and disordered regions. The distinctive amino acid
biases of high-B-factor ordered regions, short disordered regions, and long
disordered regions indicate that the sequence determinants for these flexibility 
categories differ from one another, whereas the significantly-greater-than-chance
predictability of these categories from sequence suggest that flexible ordered
regions, short disorder, and long disorder are, to a significant degree, encoded 
at the primary structure level.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.03128904 
PMCID: PMC2286519
PMID: 14691223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Structure. 2003 Nov;11(11):1316-7.

Order, disorder, and flexibility: prediction from protein sequence.

Iakoucheva LM(1), Dunker AK.

Comment on
    Structure. 2003 Nov;11(11):1453-9.

The new predictor of disordered protein regions (disEMBL) introduced in this
issue of Structure represents a computational tool developed to aid structural
biologists in the design of protein constructs that avoid disordered protein
regions in order to increase the success rate of structure determination.


PMID: 14604521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Proteins. 2003 Sep 1;52(4):573-84.

Flavors of protein disorder.

Vucetic S(1), Brown CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z.

Intrinsically disordered proteins are characterized by long regions lacking 3-D
structure in their native states, yet they have been so far associated with 28
distinguishable functions. Previous studies showed that protein predictors
trained on disorder from one type of protein often achieve poor accuracy on
disorder of proteins of a different type, thus indicating significant differences
in sequence properties among disordered proteins. Important biological problems
are identifying different types, or flavors, of disorder and examining their
relationships with protein function. Innovative use of computational methods is
needed in addressing these problems due to relative scarcity of experimental data
and background knowledge related to protein disorder. We developed an algorithm
that partitions protein disorder into flavors based on competition among
increasing numbers of predictors, with prediction accuracy determining both the
number of distinct predictors and the partitioning of the individual proteins.
Using 145 variously characterized proteins with long (>30 amino acids) disordered
regions, 3 flavors, called V, C, and S, were identified by this approach, with
the V subset containing 52 segments and 7743 residues, C containing 39 segments
and 3402 residues, and S containing 54 segments and 5752 residues. The V, C, and 
S flavors were distinguishable by amino acid compositions, sequence locations,
and biological function. For the sequences in SwissProt and 28 genomes, their
protein functions exhibit correlations with the commonness and usage of different
disorder flavors, suggesting different flavor-function sets across these protein 
groups. Overall, the results herein support the flavor-function approach as a
useful complement to structural genomics as a means for automatically assigning
possible functions to sequences.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.10437 
PMID: 12910457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Proteins. 2003;53 Suppl 6:566-72.

Predicting intrinsic disorder from amino acid sequence.

Obradovic Z(1), Peng K, Vucetic S, Radivojac P, Brown CJ, Dunker AK.

Blind predictions of intrinsic order and disorder were made on 42 proteins
subsequently revealed to contain 9,044 ordered residues, 284 disordered residues 
in 26 segments of length 30 residues or less, and 281 disordered residues in 2
disordered segments of length greater than 30 residues. The accuracies of the six
predictors used in this experiment ranged from 77% to 91% for the ordered regions
and from 56% to 78% for the disordered segments. The average of the order and
disorder predictions ranged from 73% to 77%. The prediction of disorder in the
shorter segments was poor, from 25% to 66% correct, while the prediction of
disorder in the longer segments was better, from 75% to 95% correct. Four of the 
predictors were composed of ensembles of neural networks. This enabled them to
deal more efficiently with the large asymmetry in the training data through
diversified sampling from the significantly larger ordered set and achieve better
accuracy on ordered and long disordered regions. The exclusive use of long
disordered regions for predictor training likely contributed to the disparity of 
the predictions on long versus short disordered regions, while averaging the
output values over 61-residue windows to eliminate short predictions of order or 
disorder probably contributed to the even greater disparity for three of the
predictors. This experiment supports the predictability of intrinsic disorder
from amino acid sequence.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.10532 
PMID: 14579347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Mol Biol. 2002 Oct 25;323(3):573-84.

Intrinsic disorder in cell-signaling and cancer-associated proteins.

Iakoucheva LM(1), Brown CJ, Lawson JD, ObradoviÄ Z, Dunker AK.

The number of intrinsically disordered proteins known to be involved in
cell-signaling and regulation is growing rapidly. To test for a generalized
involvement of intrinsic disorder in signaling and cancer, we applied a neural
network predictor of natural disordered regions (PONDR VL-XT) to four protein
datasets: human cancer-associated proteins (HCAP), signaling proteins (AfCS),
eukaryotic proteins from SWISS-PROT (EU_SW) and non-homologous protein segments
with well-defined (ordered) 3D structure (O_PDB_S25). PONDR VL-XT predicts >or=30
consecutive disordered residues for 79(+/-5)%, 66(+/-6)%, 47(+/-4)% and 13(+/-4)%
of the proteins from HCAP, AfCS, EU_SW, and O_PDB_S25, respectively, indicating
significantly more intrinsic disorder in cancer-associated and signaling proteins
as compared to the two control sets. The disorder analysis was extended to 11
additional functionally diverse categories of human proteins from SWISS-PROT. The
proteins involved in metabolism, biosynthesis, and degradation together with
kinases, inhibitors, transport, G-protein coupled receptors, and membrane
proteins are predicted to have at least twofold less disorder than regulatory,
cancer-associated and cytoskeletal proteins. In contrast to 44.5% of the proteins
from representative non-membrane categories, just 17.3% of the cancer-associated 
proteins had sequence alignments with structures in the Protein Data Bank
covering at least 75% of their lengths. This relative lack of structural
information correlated with the greater amount of predicted disorder in the HCAP 
dataset. A comparison of disorder predictions with the experimental structural
data for a subset of the HCAP proteins indicated good agreement between
prediction and observation. Our data suggest that intrinsically unstructured
proteins play key roles in cell-signaling, regulation and cancer, where coupled
folding and binding is a common mechanism.


PMID: 12381310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Brief Bioinform. 2002 Sep;3(3):275-84.

High-quality protein knowledge resource: SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL.

O'Donovan C(1), Martin MJ, Gattiker A, Gasteiger E, Bairoch A, Apweiler R.

SWISS-PROT is a curated protein sequence database which strives to provide a high
level of annotation (such as the description of the function of a protein, its
domain structure, post-translational modifications, variants, etc.), a minimal
level of redundancy and a high level of integration with other databases.
Together with its automatically annotated supplement TrEMBL, it provides a
comprehensive and high-quality view of the current state of knowledge about
proteins. Ongoing developments include the further improvement of functional and 
automatic annotation in the databases including evidence attribution with
particular emphasis on the human, archaeal and bacterial proteomes and the
provision of additional resources such as the International Protein Index (IPI)
and XML format of SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL to the user community.


PMID: 12230036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Mol Evol. 2002 Jul;55(1):104-10.

Evolutionary rate heterogeneity in proteins with long disordered regions.

Brown CJ(1), Takayama S, Campen AM, Vise P, Marshall TW, Oldfield CJ, Williams
CJ, Dunker AK.

The dominant view in protein science is that a three-dimensional (3-D) structure 
is a prerequisite for protein function. In contrast to this dominant view, there 
are many counterexample proteins that fail to fold into a 3-D structure, or that 
have local regions that fail to fold, and yet carry out function. Protein without
fixed 3-D structure is called intrinsically disordered. Motivated by anecdotal
accounts of higher rates of sequence evolution in disordered protein than in
ordered protein we are exploring the molecular evolution of disordered proteins. 
To test whether disordered protein evolves more rapidly than ordered protein,
pairwise genetic distances were compared between the ordered and the disordered
regions of 26 protein families having at least one member with a structurally
characterized region of disorder of 30 or more consecutive residues. For five
families, there were no significant differences in pairwise genetic distances
between ordered and disordered sequences. The disordered region evolved
significantly more rapidly than the ordered region for 19 of the 26 families. The
functions of these disordered regions are diverse, including binding sites for
protein, DNA, or RNA and also including flexible linkers. The functions of some
of these regions are unknown. The disordered regions evolved significantly more
slowly than the ordered regions for the two remaining families. The functions of 
these more slowly evolving disordered regions include sites for DNA binding. More
work is needed to understand the underlying causes of the variability in the
evolutionary rates of intrinsically ordered and disordered protein.

DOI: 10.1007/s00239-001-2309-6 
PMID: 12165847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. ScientificWorldJournal. 2002 Jun 25;2:49-50. doi: 10.1100/tsw.2002.25.
eCollection 2002.

The Protein Trinity: Structure/Function Relationships That Include Intrinsic
Disorder.

Dunker AK(1), Brown CJ(1), Lawson CJD(1), Iakoucheva-Sebat LM(1), Vucetic S(2),
Obradovic Z(2).

DOI: 10.1100/tsw.2002.25 
PMCID: PMC6009265
PMID: 29973799 


144. Bioinformatics. 2001 Jun;17(6):526-32; discussion 533-4.

Database verification studies of SWISS-PROT and GenBank.

Karp PD(1), Paley S, Zhu J.

PROBLEM STATEMENT: We have studied the relationships among SWISS-PROT, TrEMBL,
and GenBank with two goals. First is to determine whether users can reliably
identify those proteins in SWISS-PROT whose functions were determined
experimentally, as opposed to proteins whose functions were predicted
computationally. If this information was present in reasonable quantities, it
would allow researchers to decrease the propagation of incorrect function
predictions during sequence annotation, and to assemble training sets for
developing the next generation of sequence-analysis algorithms. Second is to
assess the consistency between translated GenBank sequences and sequences in
SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL.
RESULTS: (1) Contrary to claims by the SWISS-PROT authors, we conclude that
SWISS-PROT does not identify a significant number of experimentally characterized
proteins. (2) SWISS-PROT is more incomplete than we expected in that version 38.0
from July 1999 lacks many proteins from the full genomes of important organisms
that were sequenced years earlier. (3) Even if we combine SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL, 
some sequences from the full genomes are missing from the combined dataset. (4)
In many cases, translated GenBank genes do not exactly match the corresponding
SWISS-PROT sequences, for reasons that include missing or removed methionines,
differing translation start positions, individual amino-acid differences, and
inclusion of sequence data from multiple sequencing projects. For example,
results show that for Escherichia coli, 80.6% of the proteins in the GenBank
entry for the complete genome have identical sequence matches with
SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL sequences, 13.4% have exact substring matches, and matches for 
4.1% can be found using BLAST search; the remaining 2.0% of E.coli protein
sequences (most of which are ORFs) have no clear matches to SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL.
Although many of these differences can be explained by the complexity of the DB, 
and by the curation processes used to create it, the scale of the differences is 
notable.


PMID: 11395429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Mol Graph Model. 2001;19(1):26-59.

Intrinsically disordered protein.

Dunker AK(1), Lawson JD, Brown CJ, Williams RM, Romero P, Oh JS, Oldfield CJ,
Campen AM, Ratliff CM, Hipps KW, Ausio J, Nissen MS, Reeves R, Kang C, Kissinger 
CR, Bailey RW, Griswold MD, Chiu W, Garner EC, Obradovic Z.

Proteins can exist in a trinity of structures: the ordered state, the molten
globule, and the random coil. The five following examples suggest that native
protein structure can correspond to any of the three states (not just the ordered
state) and that protein function can arise from any of the three states and their
transitions. (1) In a process that likely mimics infection, fd phage converts
from the ordered into the disordered molten globular state. (2) Nucleosome
hyperacetylation is crucial to DNA replication and transcription; this chemical
modification greatly increases the net negative charge of the nucleosome core
particle. We propose that the increased charge imbalance promotes its conversion 
to a much less rigid form. (3) Clusterin contains an ordered domain and also a
native molten globular region. The molten globular domain likely functions as a
proteinaceous detergent for cell remodeling and removal of apoptotic debris. (4) 
In a critical signaling event, a helix in calcineurin becomes bound and
surrounded by calmodulin, thereby turning on calcineurin's serine/threonine
phosphatase activity. Locating the calcineurin helix within a region of disorder 
is essential for enabling calmodulin to surround its target upon binding. (5)
Calsequestrin regulates calcium levels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum by binding
approximately 50 ions/molecule. Disordered polyanion tails at the carboxy
terminus bind many of these calcium ions, perhaps without adopting a unique
structure. In addition to these examples, we will discuss 16 more proteins with
native disorder. These disordered regions include molecular recognition domains, 
protein folding inhibitors, flexible linkers, entropic springs, entropic clocks, 
and entropic bristles. Motivated by such examples of intrinsic disorder, we are
studying the relationships between amino acid sequence and order/disorder, and
from this information we are predicting intrinsic order/disorder from amino acid 
sequence. The sequence-structure relationships indicate that disorder is an
encoded property, and the predictions strongly suggest that proteins in nature
are much richer in intrinsic disorder than are those in the Protein Data Bank.
Recent predictions on 29 genomes indicate that proteins from eucaryotes
apparently have more intrinsic disorder than those from either bacteria or
archaea, with typically > 30% of eucaryotic proteins having disordered regions of
length > or = 50 consecutive residues.


PMID: 11381529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Jan 1;27(1):275-9.

The CATH Database provides insights into protein structure/function
relationships.

Orengo CA(1), Pearl FM, Bray JE, Todd AE, Martin AC, Lo Conte L, Thornton JM.

We report the latest release (version 1.4) of the CATH protein domains database
(http://www.biochem.ucl.ac.uk/bsm/cath). This is a hierarchical classification of
13 359 protein domain structures into evolutionary families and structural
groupings. We currently identify 827 homologous families in which the proteins
have both structual similarity and sequence and/or functional similarity. These
can be further clustered into 593 fold groups and 32 distinct architectures.
Using our structural classification and associated data on protein functions,
stored in the database (EC identifiers, SWISS-PROT keywords and information from 
the Enzyme database and literature) we have been able to analyse the correlation 
between the 3D structure and function. More than 96% of folds in the PDB are
associated with a single homologous family. However, within the superfolds, three
or more different functions are observed. Considering enzyme functions, more than
95% of clearly homologous families exhibit either single or closely related
functions, as demonstrated by the EC identifiers of their relatives. Our analysis
supports the view that determining structures, for example as part of a
'structural genomics' initiative, will make a major contribution to interpreting 
genome data.


PMCID: PMC148155
PMID: 9847200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

