
1. BMC Syst Biol. 2018 Jul 3;12(1):75. doi: 10.1186/s12918-018-0597-3.

Short linear motifs in intrinsically disordered regions modulate HOG signaling
capacity.

Strome B(1), Hsu IS(1), Li Cheong Man M(1), Zarin T(1), Nguyen Ba A(1), Moses
AM(2)(3).

BACKGROUND: The effort to characterize intrinsically disordered regions of
signaling proteins is rapidly expanding. An important class of disordered
interaction modules are ubiquitous and functionally diverse elements known as
short linear motifs (SLiMs).
RESULTS: To further examine the role of SLiMs in signal transduction, we used a
previously devised bioinformatics method to predict evolutionarily conserved
SLiMs within a well-characterized pathway in S. cerevisiae. Using a single cell, 
reporter-based flow cytometry assay in conjunction with a fluorescent reporter
driven by a pathway-specific promoter, we quantitatively assessed pathway output 
via systematic deletions of individual motifs. We found that, when deleted, 34%
(10/29) of predicted SLiMs displayed a significant decrease in pathway output,
providing evidence that these motifs play a role in signal transduction. Assuming
that mutations in SLiMs have quantitative effects on mechanisms of signaling, we 
show that perturbations of parameters in a previously published stochastic model 
of HOG signaling could reproduce the quantitative effects of 4 out of 7 mutations
in previously unknown SLiMs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that, even in well-characterized pathways, large 
numbers of functional elements remain undiscovered, and that challenges remain
for application of systems biology models to interpret the effects of mutations
in signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1186/s12918-018-0597-3 
PMCID: PMC6029073
PMID: 29970070 


2. Front Genet. 2018 May 22;9:182. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00182. eCollection 2018.

Functional and Structural Diversity of Acyl-coA Binding Proteins in Oil Crops.

Raboanatahiry N(1)(2), Wang B(3), Yu L(1), Li M(1)(2).

Diversities in structure and function of ACBP were discussed in this review. ACBP
are important proteins that could transport newly synthesized fatty acid,
activated into -coA, from plastid to endoplasmic reticulum, where oil in the form
of triacylglycerol occurs. ACBP were detected in various animal and plants
species, which indicated their importance in biological function. In fact,
involvement of ACBP in important process such as lipid metabolism, regulation of 
enzyme and gene expression, and in response to plant stresses has been proven in 
several studies. In this review, findings on ACBP of 11 well-known oil crops were
reviewed to comprehend diversity, comparative analyses on ACBP structure were
made, and link between structure and function, tissue expression and subcellular 
location of ACBP were also observed. Incomplete reports in some species were
mentioned, which might be encouraging to start or to perform deeper studies.
Similar characteristics were found in paralogs ACBP, and orthologs ACBP had
different functions, despite the high identity in amino acid sequence. At the
end, it is confirmed that ortholog proteins could not necessarily display the
same function, even from closely related species.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00182 
PMCID: PMC5972291
PMID: 29872448 


3. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 May 6;19(5). pii: E1384. doi: 10.3390/ijms19051384.

The Disordered C-Terminus of Yeast Hsf1 Contains a Cryptic Low-Complexity
Amyloidogenic Region.

Pujols J(1)(2), Santos J(3)(4), Pallarès I(5)(6), Ventura S(7)(8).

Response mechanisms to external stress rely on networks of proteins able to
activate specific signaling pathways to ensure the maintenance of cell
proteostasis. Many of the proteins mediating this kind of response contain
intrinsically disordered regions, which lack a defined structure, but still are
able to interact with a wide range of clients that modulate the protein function.
Some of these interactions are mediated by specific short sequences embedded in
the longer disordered regions. Because the physicochemical properties that
promote functional and abnormal interactions are similar, it has been shown that,
in globular proteins, aggregation-prone and binding regions tend to overlap. It
could be that the same principle applies for disordered protein regions. In this 
context, we show here that a predicted low-complexity interacting region in the
disordered C-terminus of the stress response master regulator heat shock factor 1
(Hsf1) protein corresponds to a cryptic amyloid region able to self-assemble into
fibrillary structures resembling those found in neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19051384 
PMCID: PMC5983738
PMID: 29734798 


4. Front Genet. 2018 May 4;9:158. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00158. eCollection 2018.

Intrinsic Disorder and Posttranslational Modifications: The Darker Side of the
Biological Dark Matter.

Darling AL(1), Uversky VN(1)(2).

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and intrinsically disordered protein
regions (IDPRs) are functional proteins and domains that devoid stable secondary 
and/or tertiary structure. IDPs/IDPRs are abundantly present in various
proteomes, where they are involved in regulation, signaling, and control, thereby
serving as crucial regulators of various cellular processes. Various mechanisms
are utilized to tightly regulate and modulate biological functions, structural
properties, cellular levels, and localization of these important controllers.
Among these regulatory mechanisms are precisely controlled degradation and
different posttranslational modifications (PTMs). Many normal cellular processes 
are associated with the presence of the right amounts of precisely activated IDPs
at right places and in right time. However, wrecked regulation of IDPs/IDPRs
might be associated with various human maladies, ranging from cancer and
neurodegeneration to cardiovascular disease and diabetes. Pathogenic
transformations of IDPs/IDPRs are often triggered by altered PTMs. This review
considers some of the aspects of IDPs/IDPRs and their normal and aberrant
regulation by PTMs.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00158 
PMCID: PMC5945825
PMID: 29780404 


5. Sci Rep. 2018 Apr 30;8(1):6716. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-25113-4.

Functional and structural characterization of osteocytic MLO-Y4 cell proteins
encoded by genes differentially expressed in response to mechanical signals in
vitro.

Meng F(1), Murray GF(2), Kurgan L(3), Donahue HJ(4).

The anabolic response of bone to mechanical load is partially the result of
osteocyte response to fluid flow-induced shear stress. Understanding signaling
pathways activated in osteocytes exposed to fluid flow could identify novel
signaling pathways involved in the response of bone to mechanical load.
Bioinformatics allows for a unique perspective and provides key first steps in
understanding these signaling pathways. We examined proteins encoded by genes
differentially expressed in response to fluid flow in murine osteocytic MLO-Y4
cells. We considered structural and functional characteristics including putative
intrinsic disorder, evolutionary conservation, interconnectedness in
protein-protein interaction networks, and cellular localization. Our analysis
suggests that proteins encoded by fluid flow activated genes have lower than
expected conservation, are depleted in intrinsic disorder, maintain typical
levels of connectivity for the murine proteome, and are found in the cytoplasm
and extracellular space. Pathway analyses reveal that these proteins are
associated with cellular response to stress, chemokine and cytokine activity,
enzyme binding, and osteoclast differentiation. The lower than expected disorder 
of proteins encoded by flow activated genes suggests they are relatively
specialized.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-25113-4 
PMCID: PMC5928037
PMID: 29712973 


6. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Apr 25;19(1):158. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2158-6.

Structural disorder of plasmid-encoded proteins in Bacteria and Archaea.

Mitić NS(1), Malkov SN(2), Kovačević JJ(2), Pavlović-Lažetić GM(2), Beljanski
MV(3).

BACKGROUND: In the last decade and a half it has been firmly established that a
large number of proteins do not adopt a well-defined (ordered) structure under
physiological conditions. Such intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and
intrinsically disordered (protein) regions (IDRs) are involved in essential cell 
processes through two basic mechanisms: the entropic chain mechanism which is
responsible for rapid fluctuations among many alternative conformations, and
molecular recognition via short recognition elements that bind to other
molecules. IDPs possess a high adaptive potential and there is special interest
in investigating their involvement in organism evolution.
RESULTS: We analyzed 2554 Bacterial and 139 Archaeal proteomes, with a total of
8,455,194 proteins for disorder content and its implications for adaptation of
organisms, using three disorder predictors and three measures. Along with other
findings, we revealed that for all three predictors and all three measures (1)
Bacteria exhibit significantly more disorder than Archaea; (2) plasmid-encoded
proteins contain considerably more IDRs than proteins encoded on chromosomes (or 
whole genomes) in both prokaryote superkingdoms; (3) plasmid proteins are
significantly more disordered than chromosomal proteins only in the group of
proteins with no COG category assigned; (4) antitoxin proteins in comparison to
other proteins, are the most disordered (almost double) in both Bacterial and
Archaeal proteomes; (5) plasmidal proteins are more disordered than chromosomal
proteins in Bacterial antitoxins and toxin-unclassified proteins, but have almost
the same disorder content in toxin proteins.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that while disorder content depends on genome and
proteome characteristics, it is more influenced by functional engagements than by
gene location (on chromosome or plasmid).

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2158-6 
PMCID: PMC5922023
PMID: 29699482 


7. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Dec 19;18(12). pii: E2761. doi: 10.3390/ijms18122761.

Functional Analysis of Human Hub Proteins and Their Interactors Involved in the
Intrinsic Disorder-Enriched Interactions.

Hu G(1), Wu Z(2), Uversky VN(3)(4), Kurgan L(5).

Some of the intrinsically disordered proteins and protein regions are promiscuous
interactors that are involved in one-to-many and many-to-one binding. Several
studies have analyzed enrichment of intrinsic disorder among the promiscuous hub 
proteins. We extended these works by providing a detailed functional
characterization of the disorder-enriched hub protein-protein interactions
(PPIs), including both hubs and their interactors, and by analyzing their
enrichment among disease-associated proteins. We focused on the human
interactome, given its high degree of completeness and relevance to the analysis 
of the disease-linked proteins. We quantified and investigated numerous
functional and structural characteristics of the disorder-enriched hub PPIs,
including protein binding, structural stability, evolutionary conservation,
several categories of functional sites, and presence of over twenty types of
posttranslational modifications (PTMs). We showed that the disorder-enriched hub 
PPIs have a significantly enlarged number of disordered protein binding regions
and long intrinsically disordered regions. They also include high numbers of
targeting, catalytic, and many types of PTM sites. We empirically demonstrated
that these hub PPIs are significantly enriched among 11 out of 18 considered
classes of human diseases that are associated with at least 100 human proteins.
Finally, we also illustrated how over a dozen specific human hubs utilize
intrinsic disorder for their promiscuous PPIs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms18122761 
PMCID: PMC5751360
PMID: 29257115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


8. Protein Sci. 2017 Nov;26(11):2195-2206. doi: 10.1002/pro.3274. Epub 2017 Sep 28.

Homology modeling in a dynamical world.

Monzon AM(1), Zea DJ(2), Marino-Buslje C(2), Parisi G(1).

A key concept in template-based modeling (TBM) is the high correlation between
sequence and structural divergence, with the practical consequence that
homologous proteins that are similar at the sequence level will also be similar
at the structural level. However, conformational diversity of the native state
will reduce the correlation between structural and sequence divergence, because
structural variation can appear without sequence diversity. In this work, we
explore the impact that conformational diversity has on the relationship between 
structural and sequence divergence. We find that the extent of conformational
diversity can be as high as the maximum structural divergence among families.
Also, as expected, conformational diversity impairs the well-established
correlation between sequence and structural divergence, which is nosier than
previously suggested. However, we found that this noise can be resolved using a
priori information coming from the structure-function relationship. We show that 
protein families with low conformational diversity show a well-correlated
relationship between sequence and structural divergence, which is severely
reduced in proteins with larger conformational diversity. This lack of
correlation could impair TBM results in highly dynamical proteins. Finally, we
also find that the presence of order/disorder can provide useful beforehand
information for better TBM performance.

© 2017 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.3274 
PMCID: PMC5654859 [Available on 2018-11-01]
PMID: 28815769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Genome Biol Evol. 2017 May 1;9(5):1248-1265. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evx073.

Evidence for a Strong Correlation Between Transcription Factor Protein Disorder
and Organismic Complexity.

Yruela I(1)(2), Oldfield CJ(3), Niklas KJ(4), Dunker AK(3).

Studies of diverse phylogenetic lineages reveal that protein disorder increases
in concert with organismic complexity but that differences nevertheless exist
among lineages. To gain insight into this phenomenology, we analyzed all of the
transcription factor (TF) families for which sequences are known for 17 species
spanning bacteria, yeast, algae, land plants, and animals and for which the
number of different cell types has been reported in the primary literature.
Although the fraction of disordered residues in TF sequences is often moderately 
or poorly correlated with organismic complexity as gauged by cell-type number
(r2 < 0.5), an unbiased and phylogenetically broad analysis shows that organismic
complexity is positively and strongly correlated with the total number of TFs,
the number of their spliced variants and their total disordered residues content 
(r2 > 0.8). Furthermore, the correlation between the fraction of disordered
residues and cell-type number becomes stronger when confined to the TF families
participating in cell cycle, cell size, cell division, cell differentiation, or
cell proliferation, and other important developmental processes. The data also
indicate that evolutionarily simpler organisms allow for the detection of subtle 
differences in the conserved IDRs of TFs as well as changes in variable IDRs,
which can influence the DNA recognition and multifunctionality of TFs through
direct or indirect mechanisms. Although strong correlations cannot be taken as
evidence for cause-and-effect relationships, we interpret our data to indicate
that increasing TF disorder likely was an important factor contributing to the
evolution of organismic complexity and not merely a concurrent unrelated effect
of increasing organismic complexity.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evx073 
PMCID: PMC5434936
PMID: 28430951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Acta Naturae. 2017 Apr-Jun;9(2):4-16.

At the Interface of Three Nucleic Acids: The Role of RNA-Binding Proteins and
Poly(ADP-ribose) in DNA Repair.

Alemasova EE(1), Lavrik OI(1)(2).

RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) regulate RNA metabolism, from synthesis to decay.
When bound to RNA, RBPs act as guardians of the genome integrity at different
levels, from DNA damage prevention to the post-transcriptional regulation of gene
expression. Recently, RBPs have been shown to participate in DNA repair. This
fact is of special interest as DNA repair pathways do not generally involve RNA. 
DNA damage in higher organisms triggers the formation of the RNA-like polymer -
poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR). Nucleic acid-like properties allow PAR to recruit DNA-
and RNA-binding proteins to the site of DNA damage. It is suggested that
poly(ADP-ribose) and RBPs not only modulate the activities of DNA repair factors,
but that they also play an important role in the formation of transient
repairosome complexes in the nucleus. Cytoplasmic biomolecules are subjected to
similar sorting during the formation of RNA assemblages by functionally related
mRNAs and promiscuous RBPs. The Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1) is the major
component of cytoplasmic RNA granules. Although YB-1 is a classic RNA-binding
protein, it is now regarded as a non-canonical factor of DNA repair.


PMCID: PMC5508997
PMID: 28740723 


11. Mol Cell. 2017 Mar 16;65(6):975-984.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.02.018.

Tardigrades Use Intrinsically Disordered Proteins to Survive Desiccation.

Boothby TC(1), Tapia H(2), Brozena AH(3), Piszkiewicz S(4), Smith AE(4),
Giovannini I(5), Rebecchi L(5), Pielak GJ(4), Koshland D(2), Goldstein B(6).

Comment in
    Trends Biochem Sci. 2017 Jun;42(6):410-412.

Tardigrades are microscopic animals that survive a remarkable array of stresses, 
including desiccation. How tardigrades survive desiccation has remained a mystery
for more than 250 years. Trehalose, a disaccharide essential for several
organisms to survive drying, is detected at low levels or not at all in some
tardigrade species, indicating that tardigrades possess potentially novel
mechanisms for surviving desiccation. Here we show that tardigrade-specific
intrinsically disordered proteins (TDPs) are essential for desiccation tolerance.
TDP genes are constitutively expressed at high levels or induced during
desiccation in multiple tardigrade species. TDPs are required for tardigrade
desiccation tolerance, and these genes are sufficient to increase desiccation
tolerance when expressed in heterologous systems. TDPs form non-crystalline
amorphous solids (vitrify) upon desiccation, and this vitrified state mirrors
their protective capabilities. Our study identifies TDPs as functional mediators 
of tardigrade desiccation tolerance, expanding our knowledge of the roles and
diversity of disordered proteins involved in stress tolerance.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.02.018 
PMCID: PMC5987194
PMID: 28306513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Hum Mutat. 2017 Mar;38(3):289-296. doi: 10.1002/humu.23155. Epub 2017 Jan 11.

Landscape of Pleiotropic Proteins Causing Human Disease: Structural and System
Biology Insights.

Ittisoponpisan S(1), Alhuzimi E(1), Sternberg MJ(1), David A(1).

Pleiotropy is the phenomenon by which the same gene can result in multiple
phenotypes. Pleiotropic proteins are emerging as important contributors to rare
and common disorders. Nevertheless, little is known on the mechanisms underlying 
pleiotropy and the characteristic of pleiotropic proteins. We analyzed
disease-causing proteins reported in UniProt and observed that 12% are
pleiotropic (variants in the same protein cause more than one disease).
Pleiotropic proteins were enriched in deleterious and rare variants, but not in
common variants. Pleiotropic proteins were more likely to be involved in the
pathogenesis of neoplasms, neurological, and circulatory diseases and congenital 
malformations, whereas non-pleiotropic proteins in endocrine and metabolic
disorders. Pleiotropic proteins were more essential and had a higher number of
interacting partners compared with non-pleiotropic proteins. Significantly more
pleiotropic than non-pleiotropic proteins contained at least one intrinsically
long disordered region (P < 0.001). Deleterious variants occurring in
structurally disordered regions were more commonly found in pleiotropic, rather
than non-pleiotropic proteins. In conclusion, pleiotropic proteins are an
important contributor to human disease. They represent a biologically different
class of proteins compared with non-pleiotropic proteins and a better
understanding of their characteristics and genetic variants can greatly aid in
the interpretation of genetic studies and drug design.

© 2016 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23155 
PMCID: PMC5748329
PMID: 27957775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Feb 17;45(3):1501-1515. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1183.

Disentangling polydispersity in the PCNA-p15PAF complex, a disordered, transient 
and multivalent macromolecular assembly.

Cordeiro TN(1), Chen PC(2), De Biasio A(3), Sibille N(1), Blanco FJ(4)(5), Hub
JS(2), Crehuet R(6), Bernadó P(1).

The intrinsically disordered p15PAF regulates DNA replication and repair when
interacting with the Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA) sliding clamp. As 
many interactions between disordered proteins and globular partners involved in
signaling and regulation, the complex between p15PAF and trimeric PCNA is of low 
affinity, forming a transient complex that is difficult to characterize at a
structural level due to its inherent polydispersity. We have determined the
structure, conformational fluctuations, and relative population of the five
species that coexist in solution by combining small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS)
with molecular modelling. By using explicit ensemble descriptions for the
individual species, built using integrative approaches and molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations, we collectively interpreted multiple SAXS profiles as
population-weighted thermodynamic mixtures. The analysis demonstrates that the
N-terminus of p15PAF penetrates the PCNA ring and emerges on the back face. This 
observation substantiates the role of p15PAF as a drag regulating PCNA
processivity during DNA repair. Our study reveals the power of ensemble-based
approaches to decode structural, dynamic, and thermodynamic information from SAXS
data. This strategy paves the way for deciphering the structural bases of
flexible, transient and multivalent macromolecular assemblies involved in pivotal
biological processes.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw1183 
PMCID: PMC5388412
PMID: 28180305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jan 4;45(D1):D219-D227. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1056. Epub
2016 Nov 28.

DisProt 7.0: a major update of the database of disordered proteins.

Piovesan D(1), Tabaro F(1)(2), Mičetić I(1), Necci M(1), Quaglia F(1), Oldfield
CJ(3), Aspromonte MC(4), Davey NE(5)(6), Davidović R(7), Dosztányi Z(8)(9),
Elofsson A(10), Gasparini A(4), Hatos A(1)(9), Kajava AV(11)(12)(13), Kalmar
L(9)(14), Leonardi E(4), Lazar T(15)(16), Macedo-Ribeiro S(17), Macossay-Castillo
M(15)(16), Meszaros A(9), Minervini G(1), Murvai N(9), Pujols J(18), Roche
DB(11)(12), Salladini E(19), Schad E(9), Schramm A(19), Szabo B(9), Tantos A(9), 
Tonello F(1)(20), Tsirigos KD(10), Veljković N(7), Ventura S(18), Vranken
W(15)(16)(21), Warholm P(10), Uversky VN(22)(23), Dunker AK(3), Longhi S(24),
Tompa P(25)(15)(16), Tosatto SC(26)(20).

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jan 4;45(D1):D1123-D1124.

The Database of Protein Disorder (DisProt, URL: www.disprot.org) has been
significantly updated and upgraded since its last major renewal in 2007. The
current release holds information on more than 800 entries of IDPs/IDRs, i.e.
intrinsically disordered proteins or regions that exist and function without a
well-defined three-dimensional structure. We have re-curated previous entries to 
purge DisProt from conflicting cases, and also upgraded the functional
classification scheme to reflect continuous advance in the field in the past 10
years or so. We define IDPs as proteins that are disordered along their entire
sequence, i.e. entirely lack structural elements, and IDRs as regions that are at
least five consecutive residues without well-defined structure. We base our
assessment of disorder strictly on experimental evidence, such as X-ray
crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (primary techniques) and a broad
range of other experimental approaches (secondary techniques). Confident and
ambiguous annotations are highlighted separately. DisProt 7.0 presents classified
knowledge regarding the experimental characterization and functional annotations 
of IDPs/IDRs, and is intended to provide an invaluable resource for the research 
community for a better understanding structural disorder and for developing
better computational tools for studying disordered proteins.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw1056 
PMCID: PMC5210544
PMID: 27899601 


15. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2016 Dec 15;4(1):e1262225. doi:
10.1080/21690707.2016.1262225. eCollection 2016.

Genes encoding intrinsic disorder in Eukaryota have high GC content.

Peng Z(1), Uversky VN(2), Kurgan L(3).

We analyze a correlation between the GC content in genes of 12 eukaryotic species
and the level of intrinsic disorder in their corresponding proteins.
Comprehensive computational analysis has revealed that the disordered regions in 
eukaryotes are encoded by the GC-enriched gene regions and that this enrichment
is correlated with the amount of disorder and is present across proteins and
species characterized by varying amounts of disorder. The GC enrichment is a
result of higher rate of amino acid coded by GC-rich codons in the disordered
regions. Individual amino acids have the same GC-content profile between
different species. Eukaryotic proteins with the disordered regions encoded by the
GC-enriched gene segments carry out important biological functions including
interactions with RNAs, DNAs, nucleotides, binding of calcium and metal ions, are
involved in transcription, transport, cell division and certain signaling
pathways, and are localized primarily in nucleus, cytosol and cytoplasm. We also 
investigate a possible relationship between GC content, intrinsic disorder and
protein evolution. Analysis of a devised "age" of amino acids, their
disorder-promoting capacity and the GC-enrichment of their codons suggests that
the early amino acids are mostly disorder-promoting and their codons are GC-rich 
while most of late amino acids are mostly order-promoting.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2016.1262225 
PMCID: PMC5314932
PMID: 28232902 


16. Oncol Rep. 2016 Dec;36(6):3172-3180. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.5135. Epub 2016 Sep 28.

Identification of a novel transcript isoform of the TTLL12 gene in human cancers.

Wen R(1), Xiao Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Yang M(2), Lin Y(3), Tang J(1).

Tubulin tyrosine ligase like 12 (TTLL12), a member of the tubulin tyrosine ligase
(TTLL) family, has not been completely characterized to date. It is reported that
histone methylation, tubulin modifications, mitotic duration and chromosome
ploidy play crucial roles in a variety of cancers, and are related to
tumorigenesis and cancer progression. A recent study showed that TTLL12 may be a 
pseudo-enzyme which has a SET-like domain and a TTL-like domain. In the present
study, we first used 3'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends (3'-RACE) to amplify the
transcripts of the TTLL12 gene from a human lung cancer cell line H1299, and
unexpectedly discovered a new transcript isoform characterized with an additional
108-bp nucleotide sequence inserted at the location from 902 to 903 bases of the 
TTLL12 coding sequence (CDS), where it also locates between exons 5 and 6. Next, 
utilizing RT-PCR and Sanger sequencing, we further confirmed the existence of
such a new transcript isoform of TTLL12 in more human cancer cells including lung
cancer cells and other cancer cells. Moreover, several lung cancer cell lines
were found to display a much higher proportion of the new isoform compared with
TTLL12 wild-type transcript. These results suggest that the new TTLL12 isoform
may be of importance for proper maintenance of lung cancer cells. Therefore, the 
new isoform of TTLL12, with the inserted sequences probably acting as a
disordered region, provides a novel perspective regarding TTLL12 functions in
human cancers including lung cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2016.5135 
PMCID: PMC5112610
PMID: 27748896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Nov 10;17(11). pii: E1874.

p53 Proteoforms and Intrinsic Disorder: An Illustration of the Protein
Structure-Function Continuum Concept.

Uversky VN(1)(2).

Although it is one of the most studied proteins, p53 continues to be an enigma.
This protein has numerous biological functions, possesses intrinsically
disordered regions crucial for its functionality, can form both homo-tetramers
and isoform-based hetero-tetramers, and is able to interact with many binding
partners. It contains numerous posttranslational modifications, has several
isoforms generated by alternative splicing, alternative promoter usage or
alternative initiation of translation, and is commonly mutated in different
cancers. Therefore, p53 serves as an important illustration of the protein
structure-function continuum concept, where the generation of multiple
proteoforms by various mechanisms defines the ability of this protein to have a
multitude of structurally and functionally different states. Considering p53 in
the light of a proteoform-based structure-function continuum represents a
non-canonical and conceptually new contemplation of structure, regulation, and
functionality of this important protein.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17111874 
PMCID: PMC5133874
PMID: 27834926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.


18. Elife. 2016 Oct 8;5. pii: e19993. doi: 10.7554/eLife.19993.

A widely employed germ cell marker is an ancient disordered protein with
reproductive functions in diverse eukaryotes.

Carmell MA(1), Dokshin GA(2), Skaletsky H(1)(3), Hu YC(1), van Wolfswinkel JC(1),
Igarashi KJ(1), Bellott DW(1), Nefedov M(4), Reddien PW(1)(3)(5), Enders GC(6),
Uversky VN(7), Mello CC(2)(3), Page DC(1)(3)(5).

The advent of sexual reproduction and the evolution of a dedicated germline in
multicellular organisms are critical landmarks in eukaryotic evolution. We report
an ancient family of GCNA (germ cell nuclear antigen) proteins that arose in the 
earliest eukaryotes, and feature a rapidly evolving intrinsically disordered
region (IDR). Phylogenetic analysis reveals that GCNA proteins emerged before the
major eukaryotic lineages diverged; GCNA predates the origin of a dedicated
germline by a billion years. Gcna gene expression is enriched in reproductive
cells across eukarya - either just prior to or during meiosis in single-celled
eukaryotes, and in stem cells and germ cells of diverse multicellular animals.
Studies of Gcna-mutant C. elegans and mice indicate that GCNA has functioned in
reproduction for at least 600 million years. Homology to IDR-containing proteins 
implicated in DNA damage repair suggests that GCNA proteins may protect the
genomic integrity of cells carrying a heritable genome.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.19993 
PMCID: PMC5098910
PMID: 27718356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests
exist.


19. Asian J Androl. 2016 Sep-Oct;18(5):695-703. doi: 10.4103/1008-682X.181818.

Prostate-associated gene 4 (PAGE4), an intrinsically disordered cancer/testis
antigen, is a novel therapeutic target for prostate cancer.

Kulkarni P(1), Dunker AK(2), Weninger K(3), Orban J(4).

Prostate-associated gene 4 (PAGE4) is a remarkably prostate-specific
Cancer/Testis Antigen that is highly upregulated in the human fetal prostate and 
its diseased states but not in the adult normal gland. PAGE4 is an intrinsically 
disordered protein (IDP) that functions as a stress-response protein to suppress 
reactive oxygen species as well as prevent DNA damage. In addition, PAGE4 is also
a transcriptional regulator that potentiates transactivation by the oncogene
c-Jun. c-Jun forms the AP-1 complex by heterodimerizing with members of the Fos
family and plays an important role in the development and pathology of the
prostate gland, underscoring the importance of the PAGE4/c-Jun interaction.
HIPK1, also a component of the stress-response pathway, phosphorylates PAGE4 at
T51 which is critical for its transcriptional activity. Phosphorylation induces
conformational and dynamic switching in the PAGE4 ensemble leading to a new
cellular function. Finally, bioinformatics evidence suggests that the PAGE4 mRNA 
could be alternatively spliced resulting in four potential isoforms of the
polypeptide alluding to the possibility of a range of conformational ensembles
with latent functions. Considered together, the data suggest that PAGE4 may
represent the first molecular link between stress and prostate cancer (PCa).
Thus, pharmacologically targeting PAGE4 may be a novel opportunity for treating
and managing patients with PCa, especially patients with low-risk disease.

DOI: 10.4103/1008-682X.181818 
PMCID: PMC5000790
PMID: 27270343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Aug 10;138(31):9730-42. doi: 10.1021/jacs.6b06543. Epub 2016 
Jul 19.

Finding Our Way in the Dark Proteome.

Bhowmick A, Brookes DH, Yost SR, Dyson HJ(1), Forman-Kay JD(2)(3), Gunter D,
Head-Gordon M, Hura GL, Pande VS(4), Wemmer DE, Wright PE(3), Head-Gordon T.

The traditional structure-function paradigm has provided significant insights for
well-folded proteins in which structures can be easily and rapidly revealed by
X-ray crystallography beamlines. However, approximately one-third of the human
proteome is comprised of intrinsically disordered proteins and regions
(IDPs/IDRs) that do not adopt a dominant well-folded structure, and therefore
remain "unseen" by traditional structural biology methods. This Perspective
considers the challenges raised by the "Dark Proteome", in which determining the 
diverse conformational substates of IDPs in their free states, in encounter
complexes of bound states, and in complexes retaining significant disorder
requires an unprecedented level of integration of multiple and complementary
solution-based experiments that are analyzed with state-of-the art molecular
simulation, Bayesian probabilistic models, and high-throughput computation. We
envision how these diverse experimental and computational tools can work together
through formation of a "computational beamline" that will allow key functional
features to be identified in IDP structural ensembles.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.6b06543 
PMCID: PMC5051545
PMID: 27387657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Bioinformatics. 2016 Jun 15;32(12):i341-i350. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw280.

DFLpred: High-throughput prediction of disordered flexible linker regions in
protein sequences.

Meng F(1), Kurgan L(2).

MOTIVATION: Disordered flexible linkers (DFLs) are disordered regions that serve 
as flexible linkers/spacers in multi-domain proteins or between structured
constituents in domains. They are different from flexible linkers/residues
because they are disordered and longer. Availability of experimentally annotated 
DFLs provides an opportunity to build high-throughput computational predictors of
these regions from protein sequences. To date, there are no computational methods
that directly predict DFLs and they can be found only indirectly by filtering
predicted flexible residues with predictions of disorder.
RESULTS: We conceptualized, developed and empirically assessed a
first-of-its-kind sequence-based predictor of DFLs, DFLpred. This method outputs 
propensity to form DFLs for each residue in the input sequence. DFLpred uses a
small set of empirically selected features that quantify propensities to form
certain secondary structures, disordered regions and structured regions, which
are processed by a fast linear model. Our high-throughput predictor can be used
on the whole-proteome scale; it needs <1 h to predict entire proteome on a single
CPU. When assessed on an independent test dataset with low sequence-identity
proteins, it secures area under the receiver operating characteristic curve equal
0.715 and outperforms existing alternatives that include methods for the
prediction of flexible linkers, flexible residues, intrinsically disordered
residues and various combinations of these methods. Prediction on the complete
human proteome reveals that about 10% of proteins have a large content of over
30% DFL residues. We also estimate that about 6000 DFL regions are long with ≥30 
consecutive residues.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/DFLpred/
CONTACT: lkurgan@vcu.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw280 
PMCID: PMC4908364
PMID: 27307636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2016 May 11;4(1):e1171278. doi:
10.1080/21690707.2016.1171278. eCollection 2016.

Intrinsic disorder in biomarkers of insulin resistance, hypoadiponectinemia, and 
endothelial dysfunction among the type 2 diabetic patients.

Al-Jiffri OH(1), Al-Sharif FM(1), Al-Jiffri EH(1), Uversky VN(2).

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a chronic and progressive disease that is
strongly associated with various complications including cardiovascular diseases 
and related mortality. The present study aimed to analyze the abundance and
functionality of intrinsically disordered regions in several biomarkers of
insulin resistance, adiponectin, and endothelial dysfunction found in the T2DM
patients. In fact, in comparison to controls, obese T2DM patients are known to
have significantly higher levels of inter-cellular adhesion molecule (iCAM-1),
vascular cell adhesion molecule (vCAM-1), and E-selectin, whereas their
adiponectin levels are relatively low. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that
these selected biomarkers (iCAM-1, vCAM-1, E-selectin, and adiponectin) are
characterized by the noticeable levels of intrinsic disorder propensity and high 
binding promiscuity, which are important features expected for proteins serving
as biomarkers. Within the limit of studied groups, there is an association
between insulin resistance and both hypoadiponectinemia and endothelial
dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2016.1171278 
PMCID: PMC5314883
PMID: 28232897 


23. Cell Commun Signal. 2016 Apr 6;14:9. doi: 10.1186/s12964-016-0132-3.

The new (dis)order in RNA regulation.

Järvelin AI(1), Noerenberg M(1), Davis I(1), Castello A(2).

RNA-binding proteins play a key role in the regulation of all aspects of RNA
metabolism, from the synthesis of RNA to its decay. Protein-RNA interactions have
been thought to be mostly mediated by canonical RNA-binding domains that form
stable secondary and tertiary structures. However, a number of pioneering studies
over the past decades, together with recent proteome-wide data, have challenged
this view, revealing surprising roles for intrinsically disordered protein
regions in RNA binding. Here, we discuss how disordered protein regions can
mediate protein-RNA interactions, conceptually grouping these regions into
RS-rich, RG-rich, and other basic sequences, that can mediate both specific and
non-specific interactions with RNA. Disordered regions can also influence RNA
metabolism through protein aggregation and hydrogel formation. Importantly,
protein-RNA interactions mediated by disordered regions can influence nearly all 
aspects of co- and post-transcriptional RNA processes and, consequently, their
disruption can cause disease. Despite growing interest in disordered protein
regions and their roles in RNA biology, their mechanisms of binding, regulation, 
and physiological consequences remain poorly understood. In the coming years, the
study of these unorthodox interactions will yield important insights into RNA
regulation in cellular homeostasis and disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12964-016-0132-3 
PMCID: PMC4822317
PMID: 27048167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 17;6:23320. doi: 10.1038/srep23320.

Looking at the carcinogenicity of human insulin analogues via the intrinsic
disorder prism.

Redwan EM(1)(2), Linjawi MH(3), Uversky VN(1)(4)(5).

Therapeutic insulin, in its native and biosynthetic forms as well as several
currently available insulin analogues, continues to be the protein of most
interest to researchers. From the time of its discovery to the development of
modern insulin analogues, this important therapeutic protein has passed through
several stages and product generations. Beside the well-known link between
diabetes and cancer risk, the currently used therapeutic insulin analogues raised
serious concerns due to their potential roles in cancer initiation and/or
progression. It is possible that structural variations in some of the insulin
analogues are responsible for the appearance of new oncogenic species with high
binding affinity to the insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) receptor. The
question we are trying to answer in this work is: are there any specific features
of the distribution of intrinsic disorder propensity within the amino acid
sequences of insulin analogues that may provide an explanation for the
carcinogenicity of the altered insulin protein?

DOI: 10.1038/srep23320 
PMCID: PMC4794765
PMID: 26983499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Methods. 2016;3(1):e34.

Application of linker technique to trap transiently interacting protein complexes
for structural studies.

Reddy Chichili VP(1), Kumar V(1), Sivaraman J(1).

Protein-protein interactions are key events controlling several biological
processes. We have developed and employed a method to trap transiently
interacting protein complexes for structural studies using glycine-rich linkers
to fuse interacting partners, one of which is unstructured. Initial steps involve
isothermal titration calorimetry to identify the minimum binding region of the
unstructured protein in its interaction with its stable binding partner. This is 
followed by computational analysis to identify the approximate site of the
interaction and to design an appropriate linker length. Subsequently, fused
constructs are generated and characterized using size exclusion chromatography
and dynamic light scattering experiments. The structure of the chimeric protein
is then solved by crystallization, and validated both in vitro and in vivo by
substituting key interacting residues of the full length, unlinked proteins with 
alanine. This protocol offers the opportunity to study crucial and currently
unattainable transient protein interactions involved in various biological
processes.

DOI: 10.14440/jbm.2016.81 
PMCID: PMC4789767
PMID: 26985443 


26. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Dec 25;17(1). pii: E24. doi: 10.3390/ijms17010024.

Compartmentalization and Functionality of Nuclear Disorder: Intrinsic Disorder
and Protein-Protein Interactions in Intra-Nuclear Compartments.

Meng F(1), Na I(2), Kurgan L(3)(4), Uversky VN(5)(6)(7)(8)(9).

The cell nucleus contains a number of membrane-less organelles or intra-nuclear
compartments. These compartments are dynamic structures representing
liquid-droplet phases which are only slightly denser than the bulk intra-nuclear 
fluid. They possess different functions, have diverse morphologies, and are
typically composed of RNA (or, in some cases, DNA) and proteins. We analyzed 3005
mouse proteins localized in specific intra-nuclear organelles, such as nucleolus,
chromatin, Cajal bodies, nuclear speckles, promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear
bodies, nuclear lamina, nuclear pores, and perinuclear compartment and compared
them with ~29,863 non-nuclear proteins from mouse proteome. Our analysis revealed
that intrinsic disorder is enriched in the majority of intra-nuclear
compartments, except for the nuclear pore and lamina. These compartments are
depleted in proteins that lack disordered domains and enriched in proteins that
have multiple disordered domains. Moonlighting proteins found in multiple
intra-nuclear compartments are more likely to have multiple disordered domains.
Protein-protein interaction networks in the intra-nuclear compartments are denser
and include more hubs compared to the non-nuclear proteins. Hubs in the
intra-nuclear compartments (except for the nuclear pore) are enriched in disorder
compared with non-nuclear hubs and non-nuclear proteins. Therefore, our work
provides support to the idea of the functional importance of intrinsic disorder
in the cell nucleus and shows that many proteins associated with sub-nuclear
organelles in nuclei of mouse cells are enriched in disorder. This high level of 
disorder in the mouse nuclear proteins defines their ability to serve as very
promiscuous binders, possessing both large quantities of potential disorder-based
interaction sites and the ability of a single such site to be involved in a large
number of interactions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17010024 
PMCID: PMC4730271
PMID: 26712748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 18;5:18586. doi: 10.1038/srep18586.

Bioinformatical parsing of folding-on-binding proteins reveals their
compositional and evolutionary sequence design.

Narasumani M(1), Harrison PM(1).

Intrinsic disorder occurs when (part of) a protein remains unfolded during normal
functioning. Intrinsically-disordered regions can contain segments that 'fold on 
binding' to another molecule. Here, we perform bioinformatical parsing of human
'folding-on-binding' (FB) proteins, into four subsets: Ordered regions, FB
regions, Disordered regions that surround FB regions ('Disordered-around-FB'),
and Other-Disordered regions. We examined the composition and evolutionary
behaviour (across vertebrate orthologs) of these subsets. From a convergence of
three separate analyses, we find that for hydrophobicity, Ordered regions
segregate from the other subsets, but the Ordered and FB regions group together
as highly conserved, and the Disordered-around-FB and Other-Disordered regions as
less conserved (with a lesser significant difference between Ordered and FB
regions). FB regions are highly-conserved with net positive charge, whereas
Disordered-around-FB have net negative charge and are relatively less hydrophobic
than FB regions. Indeed, these Disordered-around-FB regions are excessively
hydrophilic compared to other disordered regions generally. We describe how our
results point towards a possible compositionally-based steering mechanism of
folding-on-binding.

DOI: 10.1038/srep18586 
PMCID: PMC4683461
PMID: 26678310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PeerJ. 2015 Sep 22;3:e1265. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1265. eCollection 2015.

Intrinsically disordered caldesmon binds calmodulin via the "buttons on a string"
mechanism.

Permyakov SE(1), Permyakov EA(1), Uversky VN(2).

We show here that chicken gizzard caldesmon (CaD) and its C-terminal domain
(residues 636-771, CaD136) are intrinsically disordered proteins. The
computational and experimental analyses of the wild type CaD136 and series of its
single tryptophan mutants (W674A, W707A, and W737A) and a double tryptophan
mutant (W674A/W707A) suggested that although the interaction of CaD136 with
calmodulin (CaM) can be driven by the non-specific electrostatic attraction
between these oppositely charged molecules, the specificity of CaD136-CaM binding
is likely to be determined by the specific packing of important CaD136 tryptophan
residues at the CaD136-CaM interface. It is suggested that this interaction can
be described as the "buttons on a charged string" model, where the electrostatic 
attraction between the intrinsically disordered CaD136 and the CaM is solidified 
in a "snapping buttons" manner by specific packing of the CaD136 "pliable
buttons" (which are the short segments of fluctuating local structure condensed
around the tryptophan residues) at the CaD136-CaM interface. Our data also show
that all three "buttons" are important for binding, since mutation of any of the 
tryptophans affects CaD136-CaM binding and since CaD136 remains CaM-buttoned even
when two of the three tryptophans are mutated to alanines.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.1265 
PMCID: PMC4582948
PMID: 26417545 


29. Front Mol Biosci. 2015 Aug 5;2:45. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2015.00045. eCollection
2015.

Computational approaches for inferring the functions of intrinsically disordered 
proteins.

Varadi M(1), Vranken W(2), Guharoy M(1), Tompa P(1).

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are ubiquitously involved in cellular
processes and often implicated in human pathological conditions. The critical
biological roles of these proteins, despite not adopting a well-defined fold,
encouraged structural biologists to revisit their views on the protein
structure-function paradigm. Unfortunately, investigating the characteristics and
describing the structural behavior of IDPs is far from trivial, and inferring the
function(s) of a disordered protein region remains a major challenge.
Computational methods have proven particularly relevant for studying IDPs: on the
sequence level their dependence on distinct characteristics determined by the
local amino acid context makes sequence-based prediction algorithms viable and
reliable tools for large scale analyses, while on the structure level the in
silico integration of fundamentally different experimental data types is
essential to describe the behavior of a flexible protein chain. Here, we offer an
overview of the latest developments and computational techniques that aim to
uncover how protein function is connected to intrinsic disorder.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2015.00045 
PMCID: PMC4525029
PMID: 26301226 


30. Proteomics. 2015 Aug;15(16):2872-83. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201400605. Epub 2015 Jun
5.

Relating gas phase to solution conformations: Lessons from disordered proteins.

Beveridge R(1), Phillips AS(1), Denbigh L(2), Saleem HM(1), MacPhee CE(3), Barran
PE(1).

In recent years both mass spectrometry (MS) and ion mobility mass spectrometry
(IM-MS) have been developed as techniques with which to study proteins that lack 
a fixed tertiary structure but may contain regions that form secondary structure 
elements transiently, namely intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). IM-MS is a
suitable method for the study of IDPs which provides an insight to conformations 
that are present in solution, potentially enabling the analysis of lowly
populated structural forms. Here, we describe the IM-MS data of two IDPs;
α-Synuclein (α-Syn) which is implicated in Parkinson's disease, and
Apolipoprotein C-II (ApoC-II) which is involved in cardiovascular diseases. We
report an apparent discrepancy in the way that ApoC-II behaves in the gas phase. 
While most IDPs, including α-Syn, present in many charge states and a wide range 
of rotationally averaged collision cross sections (CCSs), ApoC-II presents in
just four charge states and a very narrow range of CCSs, independent of solution 
conditions. Here, we compare MS and IM-MS data of both proteins, and rationalise 
the differences between the proteins in terms of different ionisation processes
which they may adhere to.

© 2015 The Authors. PROTEOMICS Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,
Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201400605 
PMCID: PMC4744708
PMID: 25920945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 15;10(7):e0131070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131070.
eCollection 2015.

The Gcn2 Regulator Yih1 Interacts with the Cyclin Dependent Kinase Cdc28 and
Promotes Cell Cycle Progression through G2/M in Budding Yeast.

Silva RC(1), Dautel M(2), Di Genova BM(1), Amberg DC(3), Castilho BA(1),
Sattlegger E(2).

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein Yih1, when overexpressed, inhibits the eIF2 
alpha kinase Gcn2 by competing for Gcn1 binding. However, deletion of YIH1 has no
detectable effect on Gcn2 activity, suggesting that Yih1 is not a general
inhibitor of Gcn2, and has no phenotypic defect identified so far. Thus, its
physiological role is largely unknown. Here, we show that Yih1 is involved in the
cell cycle. Yeast lacking Yih1 displays morphological patterns and DNA content
indicative of a delay in the G2/M phases of the cell cycle, and this phenotype is
independent of Gcn1 and Gcn2. Accordingly, the levels of phosphorylated eIF2α,
which show a cell cycle-dependent fluctuation, are not altered in cells devoid of
Yih1. We present several lines of evidence indicating that Yih1 is in a complex
with Cdc28. Yih1 pulls down endogenous Cdc28 in vivo and this interaction is
enhanced when Cdc28 is active, suggesting that Yih1 modulates the function of
Cdc28 in specific stages of the cell cycle. We also demonstrate, by Bimolecular
Fluorescence Complementation, that endogenous Yih1 and Cdc28 interact with each
other, confirming Yih1 as a bona fide Cdc28 binding partner. Amino acid
substitutions within helix H2 of the RWD domain of Yih1 enhance Yih1-Cdc28
association. Overexpression of this mutant, but not of wild type Yih1, leads to a
phenotype similar to that of YIH1 deletion, supporting the view that Yih1 is
involved through Cdc28 in the regulation of the cell cycle. We further show that 
IMPACT, the mammalian homologue of Yih1, interacts with CDK1, the mammalian
counterpart of Cdc28, indicating that the involvement with the cell cycle is
conserved. Together, these data provide insights into the cellular function of
Yih1/IMPACT, and provide the basis for future studies on the role of this protein
in the cell cycle.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131070 
PMCID: PMC4503747
PMID: 26176233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Protein Sci. 2015 May;24(5):688-705. doi: 10.1002/pro.2641. Epub 2015 Feb 24.

Binding cavities and druggability of intrinsically disordered proteins.

Zhang Y(1), Cao H, Liu Z.

To assess the potential of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) as drug
design targets, we have analyzed the ligand-binding cavities of two datasets of
IDPs (containing 37 and 16 entries, respectively) and compared their properties
with those of conventional ordered (folded) proteins. IDPs were predicted to
possess more binding cavity than ordered proteins at similar length, supporting
the proposed advantage of IDPs economizing genome and protein resources. The
cavity number has a wide distribution within each conformation ensemble for IDPs.
The geometries of the cavities of IDPs differ from the cavities of ordered
proteins, for example, the cavities of IDPs have larger surface areas and
volumes, and are more likely to be composed of a single segment. The druggability
of the cavities was examined, and the average druggable probability is estimated 
to be 9% for IDPs, which is almost twice that for ordered proteins (5%). Some
IDPs with druggable cavities that are associated with diseases are listed. The
optimism versus obstacles for drug design for IDPs is also briefly discussed.

© 2015 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2641 
PMCID: PMC4420519
PMID: 25611056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biophys J. 2015 Apr 7;108(7):1747-1757. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2014.12.061.

Structural disorder of folded proteins: isotope-edited 2D IR spectroscopy and
Markov state modeling.

Baiz CR(1), Tokmakoff A(2).

Comment in
    Biophys J. 2015 Apr 7;108(7):1577-9.

The conformational heterogeneity of the N-terminal domain of the ribosomal
protein L9 (NTL91-39) in its folded state is investigated using isotope-edited
two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy. Backbone carbonyls are isotope-labeled
((13)C=(18)O) at five selected positions (V3, V9, V9G13, G16, and G24) to provide
a set of localized spectroscopic probes of the structure and solvent exposure at 
these positions. Structural interpretation of the amide I line shapes is enabled 
by spectral simulations carried out on structures extracted from a recent Markov 
state model. The V3 label spectrum indicates that the β-sheet contacts between
strands I and II are well folded with minimal disorder. The V9 and V9G13 label
spectra, which directly probe the hydrogen-bond contacts across the β-turn, show 
significant disorder, indicating that molecular dynamics simulations tend to
overstabilize ideally folded β-turn structures in NTL91-39. In addition,
G24-label spectra provide evidence for a partially disordered α-helix backbone
that participates in hydrogen bonding with the surrounding water.

Copyright © 2015 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2014.12.061 
PMCID: PMC4390782
PMID: 25863066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Cell Biol. 2015 Mar 30;208(7):869-80. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201501101.

A little sugar goes a long way: the cell biology of O-GlcNAc.

Bond MR, Hanover JA.

Unlike the complex glycans decorating the cell surface, the O-linked β-N-acetyl
glucosamine (O-GlcNAc) modification is a simple intracellular Ser/Thr-linked
monosaccharide that is important for disease-relevant signaling and enzyme
regulation. O-GlcNAcylation requires uridine diphosphate-GlcNAc, a precursor
responsive to nutrient status and other environmental cues. Alternative splicing 
of the genes encoding the O-GlcNAc cycling enzymes O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) and
O-GlcNAcase (OGA) yields isoforms targeted to discrete sites in the nucleus,
cytoplasm, and mitochondria. OGT and OGA also partner with cellular effectors and
act in tandem with other posttranslational modifications. The enzymes of O-GlcNAc
cycling act preferentially on intrinsically disordered domains of target proteins
impacting transcription, metabolism, apoptosis, organelle biogenesis, and
transport.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201501101 
PMCID: PMC4384737
PMID: 25825515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochem Biophys Rep. 2015 Mar 24;1:33-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2015.03.003.
eCollection 2015 May.

Intrinsically disordered proteins in the nucleus of human cells.

Frege T(1)(2), Uversky VN(1)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Intrinsically disordered proteins are known to perform a variety of important
functions such as macromolecular recognition, promiscuous binding, and signaling.
They are crucial players in various cellular pathway and processes, where they
often have key regulatory roles. Among vital cellular processes intimately linked
to the intrinsically disordered proteins is transcription, an intricate
biological performance predominantly developing inside the cell nucleus. With
this work, we gathered information about proteins that exist in various
compartments and sub-nuclear bodies of the nucleus of the human cells, with the
goal of identifying which ones are highly disordered and which functions are
ascribed to the disordered nuclear proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2015.03.003 
PMCID: PMC5668563
PMID: 29124132 


36. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2015 Mar 17;3(1):e1027032. doi:
10.1080/21690707.2015.1027032. eCollection 2015.

The intrinsic disorder alphabet. III. Dual personality of serine.

Uversky VN(1).

Proteins are natural polypeptides consisting of 20 major amino acid residues,
content and order of which in a given amino acid sequence defines the ability of 
a related protein to fold into unique functional state or to stay intrinsically
disordered. Amino acid sequences code for both foldable (ordered)
proteins/domains and for intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and IDP regions
(IDPRs), but these sequence codes are dramatically different. This difference
starts with a very general property of the corresponding amino acid sequences,
namely, their compositions. IDPs/IDPRs are enriched in specific
disorder-promoting residues, whereas amino acid sequences of ordered
proteins/domains typically contain more order-promoting residues. Therefore, the 
relative abundances of various amino acids in ordered and disordered proteins can
be used to scale amino acids according to their disorder promoting potentials.
This review continues a series of publications on the roles of different amino
acids in defining the phenomenon of protein intrinsic disorder and represents
serine, which is the third most disorder-promoting residue. Similar to previous
publications, this review represents some physico-chemical properties of serine
and the roles of this residue in structures and functions of ordered proteins,
describes major posttranslational modifications tailored to serine, and finally
gives an overview of roles of serine in structure and functions of intrinsically 
disordered proteins.

DOI: 10.1080/21690707.2015.1027032 
PMCID: PMC5314895
PMID: 28232888 


37. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2015 Mar 2;3(1):e984570. doi:
10.4161/21690707.2014.984570. eCollection 2015.

Can proteins be intrinsically disordered inside a membrane?

Kjaergaard M(1).

Intrinsically disorder has evolved in many soluble proteins because it confers a 
unique set of functional advantages. In contrast, the functions of membrane
proteins are largely understood in terms of well-defined structures. This raises 
the question: Why would the evolutionary pressures that select for disorder leave
membrane proteins untouched. In this hypothesis piece, I argue that intrinsic
disorder may exist in membrane embedded proteins, but that it will take a
different form due to the different environment. Disordered membrane proteins are
thus likely to have fully formed secondary structure, but little tertiary
structure. Furthermore, the sequence signature for disorder in membrane proteins 
is likely to be reversed; so disordered proteins are more hydrophobic than their 
folded counterparts. At present it is impossible to tell how common this type of 
disordered membrane protein is.

DOI: 10.4161/21690707.2014.984570 
PMCID: PMC5314916
PMID: 28232884 


38. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 26;3:8. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2015.00008. eCollection 
2015.

Rethinking gene regulatory networks in light of alternative splicing,
intrinsically disordered protein domains, and post-translational modifications.

Niklas KJ(1), Bondos SE(2), Dunker AK(3), Newman SA(4).

Models for genetic regulation and cell fate specification characteristically
assume that gene regulatory networks (GRNs) are essentially deterministic and
exhibit multiple stable states specifying alternative, but pre-figured cell
fates. Mounting evidence shows, however, that most eukaryotic precursor RNAs
undergo alternative splicing (AS) and that the majority of transcription factors 
contain intrinsically disordered protein (IDP) domains whose functionalities are 
context dependent as well as subject to post-translational modification (PTM).
Consequently, many transcription factors do not have fixed cis-acting regulatory 
targets, and developmental determination by GRNs alone is untenable. Modeling
these phenomena requires a multi-scale approach to explain how GRNs operationally
interact with the intra- and intercellular environments. Evidence shows that AS, 
IDP, and PTM complicate gene expression and act synergistically to facilitate and
promote time- and cell-specific protein modifications involved in cell signaling 
and cell fate specification and thereby disrupt a strict deterministic
GRN-phenotype mapping. The combined effects of AS, IDP, and PTM give proteomes
physiological plasticity, adaptive responsiveness, and developmental versatility 
without inefficiently expanding genome size. They also help us understand how
protein functionalities can undergo major evolutionary changes by buffering
mutational consequences.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2015.00008 
PMCID: PMC4341551
PMID: 25767796 


39. Biochemistry. 2015 Feb 24;54(7):1493-504. doi: 10.1021/bi501129g. Epub 2015 Feb
11.

Phosphorylated and unphosphorylated serine 13 of CDC37 stabilize distinct
interactions between its client and HSP90 binding domains.

Liu W(1), Landgraf R.

Folding and maturation of most protein kinases require chaperone assistance. In
higher eukaryotes, CDC37 is the predominant cochaperone that facilitates the
transfer of kinase clients to HSP90. Kinase recognition is thought to occur
through the N-terminal domain, which has, thus far, eluded structure
determination. Client processing also requires the phosphorylation of the
N-terminal tail at Ser13 by protein kinase CK2 (casein kinase 2). How
phosphorylation alters the molecular properties of CDC37 is not understood. We
show that the phosphorylation at Ser13 induces a large shift toward a more
compact structure, based on ANS fluorescence, while modestly increasing secondary
structure. Moreover, this transition requires interactions of the N-terminal
domain and the remainder of CDC37. The stabilizing property of the
phosphorylation event can be recreated in trans by a (phospho-Ser13) peptide
derived from the N-terminal tail. However, the phosphorylation-induced transition
is not dependent on the transferred phosphate group but rather the loss of
serine-like properties at position 13. The complete absence of the N-terminal
tail results in reduced secondary structure and unresponsiveness to subsequent
addition of peptides. The N-terminal tail may therefore serve as an
intramolecular chaperone that ensures that CDC37 assumes one of two readily
interconvertible states in a manner that impacts the interaction of the client
binding N-domain and the MC-domains, involved in dimerization and HSP90 binding.

DOI: 10.1021/bi501129g 
PMCID: PMC4840409
PMID: 25619116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2015 Feb 3;3(1):e984565. doi:
10.4161/21690707.2014.984565. eCollection 2015.

Using chemical shifts to generate structural ensembles for intrinsically
disordered proteins with converged distributions of secondary structure.

Ytreberg FM(1), Borcherds W(2), Wu H(3), Daughdrill GW(2).

A short segment of the disordered p53 transactivation domain (p53TAD) forms an
amphipathic helix when bound to the E3 ubiquitin ligase, MDM2. In the unbound
p53TAD, this short segment has transient helical secondary structure. Using a
method that combines broad sampling of conformational space with re-weighting, it
is shown that it is possible to generate multiple, independent structural
ensembles that have highly similar secondary structure distributions for both
p53TAD and a P27A mutant. Fractional amounts of transient helical secondary
structure were found at the MDM2 binding site that are very similar to estimates 
based directly on experimental observations. Structures were identified in these 
ensembles containing segments that are highly similar to short p53 peptides bound
to MDM2, even though the ensembles were re-weighted using unbound experimental
data. Ensembles were generated using chemical shift data (alpha carbon only, or
in combination with other chemical shifts) and cross-validated by predicting
residual dipolar couplings. We think this ensemble generator could be used to
predict the bound state structure of protein interaction sites in IDPs if there
are detectable amounts of matching transient secondary structure in the unbound
state.

DOI: 10.4161/21690707.2014.984565 
PMCID: PMC5314943
PMID: 28232883 


41. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2015 Jan;37:35-43. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.09.015. Epub
2014 Sep 26.

Computational analysis of signaling patterns in single cells.

Davis DM(1), Purvis JE(2).

Signaling proteins are flexible in both form and function. They can bind to
multiple molecular partners and integrate diverse types of cellular information. 
When imaged by time-lapse microscopy, many signaling proteins show complex
patterns of activity or localization that vary from cell to cell. This
heterogeneity is so prevalent that it has spurred the development of new
computational strategies to analyze single-cell signaling patterns. A collective 
observation from these analyses is that cells appear less heterogeneous when
their responses are normalized to, or synchronized with, other single-cell
measurements. In many cases, these transformed signaling patterns show distinct
dynamical trends that correspond with predictable phenotypic outcomes. When
signaling mechanisms are unclear, computational models can suggest putative
molecular interactions that are experimentally testable. Thus, computational
analysis of single-cell signaling has not only provided new ways to quantify the 
responses of individual cells, but has helped resolve longstanding questions
surrounding many well-studied human signaling proteins including NF-κB, p53,
ERK1/2, and CDK2. A number of specific challenges lie ahead for single-cell
analysis such as quantifying the contribution of non-cell autonomous signaling as
well as the characterization of protein signaling dynamics in vivo.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.09.015 
PMCID: PMC4339661
PMID: 25263011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Dec 12;15(12):23090-140. doi: 10.3390/ijms151223090.

What macromolecular crowding can do to a protein.

Kuznetsova IM(1), Turoverov KK(2), Uversky VN(3).

The intracellular environment represents an extremely crowded milieu, with a
limited amount of free water and an almost complete lack of unoccupied space.
Obviously, slightly salted aqueous solutions containing low concentrations of a
biomolecule of interest are too simplistic to mimic the "real life" situation,
where the biomolecule of interest scrambles and wades through the tightly packed 
crowd. In laboratory practice, such macromolecular crowding is typically mimicked
by concentrated solutions of various polymers that serve as model "crowding
agents". Studies under these conditions revealed that macromolecular crowding
might affect protein structure, folding, shape, conformational stability, binding
of small molecules, enzymatic activity, protein-protein interactions,
protein-nucleic acid interactions, and pathological aggregation. The goal of this
review is to systematically analyze currently available experimental data on the 
variety of effects of macromolecular crowding on a protein molecule. The review
covers more than 320 papers and therefore represents one of the most
comprehensive compendia of the current knowledge in this exciting area.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms151223090 
PMCID: PMC4284756
PMID: 25514413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2014 Dec 12;2(1):e970499. doi:
10.4161/21690693.2014.970499. eCollection 2014.

Unreported intrinsic disorder in proteins: Building connections to the literature
on IDPs.

Uversky VN(1).

This review opens a new series entitled "Unreported intrinsic disorder in
proteins." The goal of this series is to bring attention of researchers to an
interesting phenomenon of missed (or overlooked, or ignored, or unreported)
disorder. This series serves as a companion to "Digested Disorder" which provides
a quarterly review of papers on intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) found by
standard literature searches. The need for this alternative series results from
the observation that there are numerous publications that describe IDPs (or
hybrid proteins with ordered and disordered regions) yet fail to recognize many
of the key discoveries and publications in the IDP field. By ignoring the body of
work on IDPs, such publications often fail to relate their findings to prior
discoveries or fail to explore the obvious implications of their work. Thus, the 
goal of this series is not only to review these very interesting and important
papers, but also to point out how each paper relates to the IDP field and show
how common tools in the IDP field can readily take the findings in new directions
or provide a broader context for the reported findings.

DOI: 10.4161/21690693.2014.970499 
PMCID: PMC5314882
PMID: 28232880 


44. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Aug 21;10(8):e1003782. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003782. 
eCollection 2014 Aug.

Specificity and affinity quantification of flexible recognition from underlying
energy landscape topography.

Chu X(1), Wang J(2).

Flexibility in biomolecular recognition is essential and critical for many
cellular activities. Flexible recognition often leads to moderate affinity but
high specificity, in contradiction with the conventional wisdom that high
affinity and high specificity are coupled. Furthermore, quantitative
understanding of the role of flexibility in biomolecular recognition is still
challenging. Here, we meet the challenge by quantifying the intrinsic
biomolecular recognition energy landscapes with and without flexibility through
the underlying density of states. We quantified the thermodynamic intrinsic
specificity by the topography of the intrinsic binding energy landscape and the
kinetic specificity by association rate. We found that the thermodynamic and
kinetic specificity are strongly correlated. Furthermore, we found that
flexibility decreases binding affinity on one hand, but increases binding
specificity on the other hand, and the decreasing or increasing proportion of
affinity and specificity are strongly correlated with the degree of flexibility. 
This shows more (less) flexibility leads to weaker (stronger) coupling between
affinity and specificity. Our work provides a theoretical foundation and
quantitative explanation of the previous qualitative studies on the relationship 
among flexibility, affinity and specificity. In addition, we found that the
folding energy landscapes are more funneled with binding, indicating that binding
helps folding during the recognition. Finally, we demonstrated that the whole
binding-folding energy landscapes can be integrated by the rigid binding and
isolated folding energy landscapes under weak flexibility. Our results provide a 
novel way to quantify the affinity and specificity in flexible biomolecular
recognition.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003782 
PMCID: PMC4140643
PMID: 25144525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2014 Aug 15;2(1):e34500. doi: 10.4161/idp.34500.
eCollection 2014.

Actinous enigma or enigmatic actin: Folding, structure, and functions of the most
abundant eukaryotic protein.

Povarova OI(1), Uversky VN(2), Kuznetsova IM(3), Turoverov KK(3).

Being the most abundant protein of the eukaryotic cell, actin continues to keep
its secrets for more than 60 years. Everything about this protein, its structure,
functions, and folding, is mysteriously counterintuitive, and this review
represents an attempt to solve some of the riddles and conundrums commonly found 
in the field of actin research. In fact, actin is a promiscuous binder with a
wide spectrum of biological activities. It can exist in at least three structural
forms, globular, fibrillar, and inactive (G-, F-, and I-actin, respectively).
G-actin represents a thermodynamically instable, quasi-stationary state, which is
formed in vivo as a result of the energy-intensive, complex posttranslational
folding events controlled and driven by cellular folding machinery. The G-actin
structure is dependent on the ATP and Mg2+ binding (which in vitro is typically
substituted by Ca2+) and protein is easily converted to the I-actin by the
removal of metal ions and by action of various denaturing agents (pH,
temperature, and chemical denaturants). I-actin cannot be converted back to the
G-form. Foldable and "natively folded" forms of actin are always involved in
interactions either with the specific protein partners, such as Hsp70 chaperone, 
prefoldin, and the CCT chaperonin during the actin folding in vivo or with Mg2+
and ATP as it takes place in the G-form. We emphasize that the solutions for the 
mysteries of actin multifunctionality, multistructurality, and trapped unfolding 
can be found in the quasi-stationary nature of this enigmatic protein, which
clearly possesses many features attributed to both globular and intrinsically
disordered proteins.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.34500 
PMCID: PMC5314930
PMID: 28232879 


46. Protein Sci. 2014 Aug;23(8):1077-93. doi: 10.1002/pro.2494. Epub 2014 Jun 11.

The structural and functional signatures of proteins that undergo multiple events
of post-translational modification.

Pejaver V(1), Hsu WL, Xin F, Dunker AK, Uversky VN, Radivojac P.

The structural, functional, and mechanistic characterization of several types of 
post-translational modifications (PTMs) is well-documented. PTMs, however, may
interact or interfere with one another when regulating protein function. Yet,
characterization of the structural and functional signatures of their crosstalk
has been hindered by the scarcity of data. To this end, we developed a unified
sequence-based predictor of 23 types of PTM sites that, we believe, is a useful
tool in guiding biological experiments and data interpretation. We then used
experimentally determined and predicted PTM sites to investigate two particular
cases of potential PTM crosstalk in eukaryotes. First, we identified proteins
statistically enriched in multiple types of PTM sites and found that they show
preferences toward intrinsically disordered regions as well as functional roles
in transcriptional, posttranscriptional, and developmental processes. Second, we 
observed that target sites modified by more than one type of PTM, referred to as 
shared PTM sites, show even stronger preferences toward disordered regions than
their single-PTM counterparts; we explain this by the need for these regions to
accommodate multiple partners. Finally, we investigated the influence of single
and shared PTMs on differential regulation of protein-protein interactions. We
provide evidence that molecular recognition features (MoRFs) show significant
preferences for PTM sites, particularly shared PTM sites, implicating PTMs in the
modulation of this specific type of macromolecular recognition. We conclude that 
intrinsic disorder is a strong structural prerequisite for complex PTM-based
regulation, particularly in context-dependent protein-protein interactions
related to transcriptional and developmental processes.AVAILABILITY:
www.modpred.org.

© 2014 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2494 
PMCID: PMC4116656
PMID: 24888500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Front Mol Biosci. 2014 Jul 25;1:6. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2014.00006. eCollection
2014.

Wrecked regulation of intrinsically disordered proteins in diseases:
pathogenicity of deregulated regulators.

Uversky VN(1).

Biologically active proteins without stable tertiary structure are common in all 
known proteomes. Functions of these intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are 
typically related to regulation, signaling, and control. Cellular levels of these
important regulators are tightly regulated by a variety mechanisms ranging from
firmly controlled expression to precisely targeted degradation. Functions of IDPs
are controlled by binding to specific partners, alternative splicing, and
posttranslational modifications among other means. In the norm, right amounts of 
precisely activated IDPs have to be present in right time at right places.
Wrecked regulation brings havoc to the ordered world of disordered proteins,
leading to protein misfolding, misidentification, and missignaling that give rise
to numerous human diseases, such as cancer, cardiovascular disease,
neurodegenerative diseases, and diabetes. Among factors inducing pathogenic
transformations of IDPs are various cellular mechanisms, such as chromosomal
translocations, damaged splicing, altered expression, frustrated
posttranslational modifications, aberrant proteolytic degradation, and defective 
trafficking. This review presents some of the aspects of deregulated regulation
of IDPs leading to human diseases.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2014.00006 
PMCID: PMC4428494
PMID: 25988147 


48. Chem Rev. 2014 Jul 9;114(13):6661-714. doi: 10.1021/cr400695p. Epub 2014 Jun 5.

Physicochemical properties of cells and their effects on intrinsically disordered
proteins (IDPs).

Theillet FX(1), Binolfi A, Frembgen-Kesner T, Hingorani K, Sarkar M, Kyne C, Li
C, Crowley PB, Gierasch L, Pielak GJ, Elcock AH, Gershenson A, Selenko P.

DOI: 10.1021/cr400695p 
PMCID: PMC4095937
PMID: 24901537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Chem Rev. 2014 Jul 9;114(13):6844-79. doi: 10.1021/cr400713r. Epub 2014 May 15.

Pathological unfoldomics of uncontrolled chaos: intrinsically disordered proteins
and human diseases.

Uversky VN(1), Davé V, Iakoucheva LM, Malaney P, Metallo SJ, Pathak RR, Joerger
AC.

DOI: 10.1021/cr400713r 
PMCID: PMC4100540
PMID: 24830552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Chem Rev. 2014 Jul 9;114(13):6806-43. doi: 10.1021/cr4007329. Epub 2014 Apr 4.

Disordered proteinaceous machines.

Fuxreiter M(1), Tóth-Petróczy Á, Kraut DA, Matouschek A, Lim RY, Xue B, Kurgan L,
Uversky VN.

Erratum in
    Chem Rev. 2015 Apr 8;115(7):2780. Matouschek, Andreas T [corrected to Matouschek,
Andreas].

DOI: 10.1021/cr4007329 
PMCID: PMC4350607
PMID: 24702702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Chem Rev. 2014 Jul 9;114(13):6779-805. doi: 10.1021/cr400459c. Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Conditionally and transiently disordered proteins: awakening cryptic disorder to 
regulate protein function.

Jakob U(1), Kriwacki R, Uversky VN.

DOI: 10.1021/cr400459c 
PMCID: PMC4090257
PMID: 24502763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Phys Chem B. 2014 Jun 19;118(24):6405-16. doi: 10.1021/jp410275y. Epub 2014 Jan
28.

Comparison of structure determination methods for intrinsically disordered
amyloid-β peptides.

Ball KA(1), Wemmer DE, Head-Gordon T.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) represent a new frontier in structural
biology since the primary characteristic of IDPs is that structures need to be
characterized as diverse ensembles of conformational substates. We compare two
general but very different ways of combining NMR spectroscopy with theoretical
methods to derive structural ensembles for the disease IDPs amyloid-β 1-40 and
amyloid-β 1-42, which are associated with Alzheimer's Disease. We analyze the
performance of de novo molecular dynamics and knowledge-based approaches for
generating structural ensembles by assessing their ability to reproduce a range
of NMR experimental observables. In addition to the comparison of computational
methods, we also evaluate the relative value of different types of NMR data for
refining or validating the IDP structural ensembles for these important disease
peptides.

DOI: 10.1021/jp410275y 
PMCID: PMC4066902
PMID: 24410358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Protein Sci. 2014 Jun;23(6):669-82. doi: 10.1002/pro.2467. Epub 2014 Apr 17.

The dynamic duo: combining NMR and small angle scattering in structural biology.

Hennig J(1), Sattler M.

Structural biology provides essential information for elucidating molecular
mechanisms that underlie biological function. Advances in hardware, sample
preparation, experimental methods, and computational approaches now enable
structural analysis of protein complexes with increasing complexity that more
closely represent biologically entities in the cellular environment. Integrated
multidisciplinary approaches are required to overcome limitations of individual
methods and take advantage of complementary aspects provided by different
structural biology techniques. Although X-ray crystallography remains the method 
of choice for structural analysis of large complexes, crystallization of flexible
systems is often difficult and does typically not provide insights into
conformational dynamics present in solution. Nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (NMR) is well-suited to study dynamics at picosecond to second time 
scales, and to map binding interfaces even of large systems at residue resolution
but suffers from poor sensitivity with increasing molecular weight. Small angle
scattering (SAS) methods provide low resolution information in solution and can
characterize dynamics and conformational equilibria complementary to
crystallography and NMR. The combination of NMR, crystallography, and SAS is,
thus, very useful for analysis of the structure and conformational dynamics of
(large) protein complexes in solution. In high molecular weight systems, where
NMR data are often sparse, SAS provides additional structural information and can
differentiate between NMR-derived models. Scattering data can also validate the
solution conformation of a crystal structure and indicate the presence of
conformational equilibria. Here, we review current state-of-the-art approaches
for combining NMR, crystallography, and SAS data to characterize protein
complexes in solution.

© 2014 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2467 
PMCID: PMC4093944
PMID: 24687405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Protein Sci. 2014 May;23(5):539-50. doi: 10.1002/pro.2443. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Advantages of proteins being disordered.

Liu Z(1), Huang Y.

The past decade has witnessed great advances in our understanding of protein
structure-function relationships in terms of the ubiquitous existence of
intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and intrinsically disordered regions
(IDRs). The structural disorder of IDPs/IDRs enables them to play essential
functions that are complementary to those of ordered proteins. In addition,
IDPs/IDRs are persistent in evolution. Therefore, they are expected to possess
some advantages over ordered proteins. In this review, we summarize and survey
nine possible advantages of IDPs/IDRs: economizing genome/protein resources,
overcoming steric restrictions in binding, achieving high specificity with low
affinity, increasing binding rate, facilitating posttranslational modifications, 
enabling flexible linkers, preventing aggregation, providing resistance to
non-native conditions, and allowing compatibility with more available sequences. 
Some potential advantages of IDPs/IDRs are not well understood and require both
experimental and theoretical approaches to decipher. The connection with protein 
design is also briefly discussed.

© 2014 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2443 
PMCID: PMC4005706
PMID: 24532081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Mol Biol. 2014 Jan 9;426(1):62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.09.036. Epub 2013
Oct 10.

The cytoplasmic domain of the T-cell receptor zeta subunit does not form
disordered dimers.

Nourse A(1), Mittag T(2).

Intrinsically disordered regions in proteins play active roles in recognition,
signaling and molecular sorting. They often undergo coupled folding and binding
giving rise to largely ordered interfaces with their binding partners. The
cytoplasmic region of the T-cell receptor zeta subunit (ζcyt) has been previously
proposed to specifically dimerize in the absence of a disorder-to-order
transition, suggesting an intriguing dimerization mechanism that may involve
multiple transient interfaces. We show here using analytical ultracentrifugation,
NMR, size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) and multi-angle light scattering that
neither ζcyt nor the cytoplasmic region of CD3ε significantly populates a dimeric
state but that they are mostly monomers in solution up to millimolar
concentrations. They experience a salt- and concentration-dependent shift of
their elution volume in SEC previously interpreted as dimerization. Our data show
that ζcyt does not form a highly disordered protein complex and leaves open the
question as to whether completely disordered dimers (or other oligomers) exist in
nature.

© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.09.036 
PMCID: PMC3919065
PMID: 24120941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014;15 Suppl 17:S4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-S17-S4. Epub
2014 Dec 16.

Improving protein order-disorder classification using charge-hydropathy plots.

Huang F, Oldfield CJ, Xue B, Hsu WL, Meng J, Liu X, Shen L, Romero P, Uversky VN,
Dunker A.

Erratum in
    BMC Bioinformatics. 2015;16:241.

BACKGROUND: The earliest whole protein order/disorder predictor (Uversky et al., 
Proteins, 41: 415-427 (2000)), herein called the charge-hydropathy (C-H) plot,
was originally developed using the Kyte-Doolittle (1982) hydropathy scale (Kyte &
Doolittle., J. Mol. Biol, 157: 105-132(1982)). Here the goal is to determine
whether the performance of the C-H plot in separating structured and disordered
proteins can be improved by using an alternative hydropathy scale.
RESULTS: Using the performance of the CH-plot as the metric, we compared 19
alternative hydropathy scales, with the finding that the Guy (1985) hydropathy
scale (Guy, Biophys. J, 47:61-70(1985)) was the best of the tested hydropathy
scales for separating large collections structured proteins and intrinsically
disordered proteins (IDPs) on the C-H plot. Next, we developed a new scale, named
IDP-Hydropathy, which further improves the discrimination between structured
proteins and IDPs. Applying the C-H plot to a dataset containing 109 IDPs and 563
non-homologous fully structured proteins, the Kyte-Doolittle (1982) hydropathy
scale, the Guy (1985) hydropathy scale, and the IDP-Hydropathy scale gave
balanced two-state classification accuracies of 79%, 84%, and 90%, respectively, 
indicating a very substantial overall improvement is obtained by using different 
hydropathy scales. A correlation study shows that IDP-Hydropathy is strongly
correlated with other hydropathy scales, thus suggesting that IDP-Hydropathy
probably has only minor contributions from amino acid properties other than
hydropathy.
CONCLUSION: We suggest that IDP-Hydropathy would likely be the best scale to use 
for any type of algorithm developed to predict protein disorder.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-S17-S4 
PMCID: PMC4304195
PMID: 25559583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS Curr. 2013 Nov 13;5. pii:
ecurrents.outbreaks.22254b58675cdebc256dbe3c5aa6498b. doi:
10.1371/currents.outbreaks.22254b58675cdebc256dbe3c5aa6498b.

Prediction of Intrinsic Disorder in MERS-CoV/HCoV-EMC Supports a High Oral-Fecal 
Transmission.

Goh GK(1), Dunker AK, Uversky V.

A novel coronavirus, MERS-CoV (NCoV, HCoV-EMC/2012), originating from the
Middle-East, has been discovered. Incoming data reveal that the virus is highly
virulent to humans. A model that categorizes coronaviuses according to the
hardness of their shells was developed before the discovery of MERS-CoV. Using
protein intrinsic disorder prediction, coronaviruses were categorized into three 
groups that can be linked to the levels of oral-fecal and respiratory
transmission regardless of genetic proximity. Using this model, MERS-CoV is
placed into disorder group C, which consists of coronaviruses that have
relatively hard inner and outer shells. The members of this group are likely to
persist in the environment for a longer period of time and possess the highest
oral-fecal components but relatively low respiratory transmission components.
Oral-urine and saliva transmission are also highly possible since both require
harder protective shells. Results show that disorder prediction can be used as a 
tool that suggests clues to look for in further epidemiological investigations.

DOI: 10.1371/currents.outbreaks.22254b58675cdebc256dbe3c5aa6498b 
PMCID: PMC3828228
PMID: 24270586 


58. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 17;8(10):e76972. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076972.
eCollection 2013.

The transcriptional repressor domain of Gli3 is intrinsically disordered.

Tsanev R(1), Vanatalu K, Jarvet J, Tanner R, Laur K, Tiigimägi P, Kragelund BB,
Østerlund T, Kogerman P.

The transcription factor Gli3 is acting mainly as a transcriptional repressor in 
the Sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway. Gli3 contains a repressor domain 
in its N-terminus from residue G106 to E236. In this study we have characterized 
the intracellular structure of the Gli3 repressor domain using a combined
bioinformatics and experimental approach. According to our findings the Gli3
repressor domain while being intrinsically disordered contains predicted anchor
sites for partner interactions. The obvious interaction partners to test were Ski
and DNA; however, with both of these the structure of Gli3 repressor domain
remained disordered. To locate residues important for the repressor function we
mutated several residues within the Gli3 repressor domain. Two of these, H141A
and H157N, targeting predicted helical regions, significantly decreased
transcriptional repression and thus identify important functional parts of the
domain.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076972 
PMCID: PMC3798401
PMID: 24146948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. F1000Res. 2013 Sep 17;2:190. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.2-190.v1. eCollection
2013.

On the intrinsic disorder status of the major players in programmed cell death
pathways.

Uversky AV(1), Xue B(2), Peng Z(3), Kurgan L(3), Uversky VN(4).

Earlier computational and bioinformatics analysis of several large protein
datasets across 28 species showed that proteins involved in regulation and
execution of programmed cell death (PCD) possess substantial amounts of intrinsic
disorder. Based on the comprehensive analysis of these datasets by a wide array
of modern bioinformatics tools it was concluded that disordered regions of
PCD-related proteins are involved in a multitude of biological functions and
interactions with various partners, possess numerous posttranslational
modification sites, and have specific evolutionary patterns (Peng et al. 2013).
This study extends our previous work by providing information on the intrinsic
disorder status of some of the major players of the three major PCD pathways:
apoptosis, autophagy, and necroptosis. We also present a detailed description of 
the disorder status and interactomes of selected proteins that are involved in
the p53-mediated apoptotic signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.2-190.v1 
PMCID: PMC3829196
PMID: 24358900 


60. Front Plant Sci. 2013 Sep 12;4:363. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00363.

Protein intrinsic disorder in plants.

Pazos F(1), Pietrosemoli N, García-Martín JA, Solano R.

To some extent contradicting the classical paradigm of the relationship between
protein 3D structure and function, now it is clear that large portions of the
proteomes, especially in higher organisms, lack a fixed structure and still
perform very important functions. Proteins completely or partially unstructured
in their native (functional) form are involved in key cellular processes
underlain by complex networks of protein interactions. The intrinsic
conformational flexibility of these disordered proteins allows them to bind
multiple partners in transient interactions of high specificity and low affinity.
In concordance, in plants this type of proteins has been found in processes
requiring these complex and versatile interaction networks. These include
transcription factor networks, where disordered proteins act as integrators of
different signals or link different transcription factor subnetworks due to their
ability to interact (in many cases simultaneously) with different partners.
Similarly, they also serve as signal integrators in signaling cascades, such as
those related to response to external stimuli. Disordered proteins have also been
found in plants in many stress-response processes, acting as protein chaperones
or protecting other cellular components and structures. In plants, it is
especially important to have complex and versatile networks able to quickly and
efficiently respond to changing environmental conditions since these organisms
cannot escape and have no other choice than adapting to them. Consequently,
protein disorder can play an especially important role in plants, providing them 
with a fast mechanism to obtain complex, interconnected and versatile molecular
networks.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00363 
PMCID: PMC3770944
PMID: 24062761 


61. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 27;8(8):e73476. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073476. eCollection
2013.

Ordered disorder of the astrocytic dystrophin-associated protein complex in the
norm and pathology.

Na I(1), Redmon D, Kopa M, Qin Y, Xue B, Uversky VN.

The abundance and potential functional roles of intrinsically disordered regions 
in aquaporin-4, Kir4.1, a dystrophin isoforms Dp71, α-1 syntrophin, and
α-dystrobrevin; i.e., proteins constituting the functional core of the astrocytic
dystrophin-associated protein complex (DAPC), are analyzed by a wealth of
computational tools. The correlation between protein intrinsic disorder, single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and protein function is also studied together
with the peculiarities of structural and functional conservation of these
proteins. Our study revealed that the DAPC members are typical hybrid proteins
that contain both ordered and intrinsically disordered regions. Both ordered and 
disordered regions are important for the stabilization of this complex. Many
disordered binding regions of these five proteins are highly conserved among
vertebrates. Conserved eukaryotic linear motifs and molecular recognition
features found in the disordered regions of five protein constituting DAPC likely
enhance protein-protein interactions that are required for the cellular functions
of this complex. Curiously, the disorder-based binding regions are rarely
affected by SNPs suggesting that these regions are crucial for the biological
functions of their corresponding proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073476 
PMCID: PMC3754965
PMID: 24014171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Front Genet. 2013 Aug 14;4:149. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00149. eCollection 2013.

Structural disorder and the loss of RNA homeostasis in aging and
neurodegenerative disease.

Gray DA(1), Woulfe J.

Whereas many cases of neurodegenerative disease feature the abnormal accumulation
of protein, an abundance of recent literature highlights loss of RNA homeostasis 
as a ubiquitous and central feature of pathological states. In some diseases
expanded repeats have been identified in non-coding regions of disease-associated
transcripts, calling into question the relevance of protein in the disease
mechanism. We review the literature in support of a hypothesis that intrinsically
disordered proteins (proteins that lack a stable three dimensional conformation) 
are particularly sensitive to an age-related decline in maintenance of protein
homeostasis. The potential consequences for structurally disordered RNA-binding
proteins are explored, including their aggregation into complexes that could be
transmitted through a prion-like mechanism. We propose that the spread of
ribonucleoprotein complexes through the nervous system could propagate a neuronal
error catastrophe at the level of RNA metabolism.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00149 
PMCID: PMC3743304
PMID: 23967011 


63. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 2;288(31):22333-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.456012. Epub 2013
Jun 19.

Intrinsically disordered enamel matrix protein ameloblastin forms ribbon-like
supramolecular structures via an N-terminal segment encoded by exon 5.

Wald T(1), Osickova A, Sulc M, Benada O, Semeradtova A, Rezabkova L, Veverka V,
Bednarova L, Maly J, Macek P, Sebo P, Slaby I, Vondrasek J, Osicka R.

Tooth enamel, the hardest tissue in the body, is formed by the evolutionarily
highly conserved biomineralization process that is controlled by extracellular
matrix proteins. The intrinsically disordered matrix protein ameloblastin (AMBN) 
is the most abundant nonamelogenin protein of the developing enamel and a key
element for correct enamel formation. AMBN was suggested to be a cell adhesion
molecule that regulates proliferation and differentiation of ameloblasts.
Nevertheless, detailed structural and functional studies on AMBN have been
substantially limited by the paucity of the purified nondegraded protein. With
this study, we have developed a procedure for production of a highly purified
form of recombinant human AMBN in quantities that allowed its structural
characterization. Using size exclusion chromatography, analytical
ultracentrifugation, transmission electron, and atomic force microscopy
techniques, we show that AMBN self-associates into ribbon-like supramolecular
structures with average widths and thicknesses of 18 and 0.34 nm, respectively.
The AMBN ribbons exhibited lengths ranging from tens to hundreds of nm. Deletion 
analysis and NMR spectroscopy revealed that an N-terminal segment encoded by exon
5 comprises two short independently structured regions and plays a key role in
self-assembly of AMBN.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.456012 
PMCID: PMC3829324
PMID: 23782691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Nature. 2013 Jun 20;498(7454):390-4. doi: 10.1038/nature12294.

Modulation of allostery by protein intrinsic disorder.

Ferreon AC(1), Ferreon JC, Wright PE, Deniz AA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2013 Jun 20;498(7454):308-10.

Allostery is an intrinsic property of many globular proteins and enzymes that is 
indispensable for cellular regulatory and feedback mechanisms. Recent theoretical
and empirical observations indicate that allostery is also manifest in
intrinsically disordered proteins, which account for a substantial proportion of 
the proteome. Many intrinsically disordered proteins are promiscuous binders that
interact with multiple partners and frequently function as molecular hubs in
protein interaction networks. The adenovirus early region 1A (E1A) oncoprotein is
a prime example of a molecular hub intrinsically disordered protein. E1A can
induce marked epigenetic reprogramming of the cell within hours after infection, 
through interactions with a diverse set of partners that include key host
regulators such as the general transcriptional coactivator CREB binding protein
(CBP), its paralogue p300, and the retinoblastoma protein (pRb; also called RB1).
Little is known about the allosteric effects at play in E1A-CBP-pRb interactions,
or more generally in hub intrinsically disordered protein interaction networks.
Here we used single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer (smFRET) to
study coupled binding and folding processes in the ternary E1A system. The low
concentrations used in these high-sensitivity experiments proved to be essential 
for these studies, which are challenging owing to a combination of E1A
aggregation propensity and high-affinity binding interactions. Our data revealed 
that E1A-CBP-pRb interactions have either positive or negative cooperativity,
depending on the available E1A interaction sites. This striking cooperativity
switch enables fine-tuning of the thermodynamic accessibility of the ternary
versus binary E1A complexes, and may permit a context-specific tuning of
associated downstream signalling outputs. Such a modulation of allosteric
interactions is probably a common mechanism in molecular hub intrinsically
disordered protein function.

DOI: 10.1038/nature12294 
PMCID: PMC3718496
PMID: 23783631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Protein Sci. 2013 Jun;22(6):693-724. doi: 10.1002/pro.2261. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

A decade and a half of protein intrinsic disorder: biology still waits for
physics.

Uversky VN(1).

The abundant existence of proteins and regions that possess specific functions
without being uniquely folded into unique 3D structures has become accepted by a 
significant number of protein scientists. Sequences of these intrinsically
disordered proteins (IDPs) and IDP regions (IDPRs) are characterized by a number 
of specific features, such as low overall hydrophobicity and high net charge
which makes these proteins predictable. IDPs/IDPRs possess large hydrodynamic
volumes, low contents of ordered secondary structure, and are characterized by
high structural heterogeneity. They are very flexible, but some may undergo
disorder to order transitions in the presence of natural ligands. The degree of
these structural rearrangements varies over a very wide range. IDPs/IDPRs are
tightly controlled under the normal conditions and have numerous specific
functions that complement functions of ordered proteins and domains. When lacking
proper control, they have multiple roles in pathogenesis of various human
diseases. Gaining structural and functional information about these proteins is a
challenge, since they do not typically "freeze" while their "pictures are taken."
However, despite or perhaps because of the experimental challenges, these fuzzy
objects with fuzzy structures and fuzzy functions are among the most interesting 
targets for modern protein research. This review briefly summarizes some of the
recent advances in this exciting field and considers some of the basic lessons
learned from the analysis of physics, chemistry, and biology of IDPs.

© 2013 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2261 
PMCID: PMC3690711
PMID: 23553817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Biosyst. 2013 Apr 5;9(4):645-57. doi: 10.1039/c3mb25517d.

Protein intrinsic disorder in the acetylome of intracellular and extracellular
Toxoplasma gondii.

Xue B(1), Jeffers V, Sullivan WJ, Uversky VN.

Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular parasite of the phylum
Apicomplexa, which includes a number of species of medical and veterinary
importance. Inhibitors of lysine deacetylases (KDACs) exhibit potent
antiparasitic activity, suggesting that interference with lysine acetylation
pathways holds promise for future drug targeting. Using high resolution LC-MS/MS 
to identify parasite peptides enriched by immunopurification with acetyl-lysine
antibody, we recently produced an acetylome of the proliferative intracellular
stage of Toxoplasma. In this study, we used similar approaches to greatly expand 
the Toxoplasma acetylome by identifying acetylated proteins in non-replicating
extracellular tachyzoites. The functional breakdown of acetylated proteins in
extracellular parasites is similar to intracellular parasites, with an enrichment
of proteins involved in metabolism, translation, and chromatin biology.
Altogether, we have now detected over 700 acetylation sites on a wide variety of 
parasite proteins of diverse function in multiple subcellular compartments. We
found 96 proteins uniquely acetylated in intracellular parasites, 216 uniquely
acetylated in extracellular parasites, and 177 proteins acetylated in both
states. Our findings suggest that dramatic changes occur at the proteomic level
as tachyzoites transition from the intracellular to the extracellular
environment, similar to reports documenting significant changes in gene
expression during this transition. The expanded dataset also allowed a thorough
analysis of the degree of protein intrinsic disorder surrounding lysine residues 
targeted for this post-translational modification. These analyses indicate that
acetylated lysines in proteins from extracellular and intracellular tachyzoites
are largely located within similar local environments, and that lysine
acetylation preferentially occurs in intrinsically disordered or flexible
regions.

DOI: 10.1039/c3mb25517d 
PMCID: PMC3594623
PMID: 23403842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Apr 1;1(1):e25724. doi: 10.4161/idp.25724.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

Distribution and cluster analysis of predicted intrinsically disordered protein
Pfam domains.

Williams RW(1), Xue B(2)(3), Uversky VN(2)(3)(4)(5), Dunker AK(2).

The Pfam database groups regions of proteins by how well hidden Markov models
(HMMs) can be trained to recognize similarities among them. Conservation pressure
is probably in play here. The Pfam seed training set includes sequence and
structure information, being drawn largely from the PDB. A long standing
hypothesis among intrinsically disordered protein (IDP) investigators has held
that conservation pressures are also at play in the evolution of different kinds 
of intrinsic disorder, but we find that predicted intrinsic disorder (PID) is not
always conserved across Pfam domains. Here we analyze distributions and clusters 
of PID regions in 193024 members of the version 23.0 Pfam seed database. To
include the maximum information available for proteins that remain unfolded in
solution, we employ the 10 linearly independent Kidera factors1-3 for the amino
acids, combined with PONDR4 predictions of disorder tendency, to transform the
sequences of these Pfam members into an 11 column matrix where the number of rows
is the length of each Pfam region. Cluster analyses of the set of all regions,
including those that are folded, show 6 groupings of domains. Cluster analyses of
domains with mean VSL2b scores greater than 0.5 (half predicted disorder or more)
show at least 3 separated groups. It is hypothesized that grouping sets into
shorter sequences with more uniform length will reveal more information about
intrinsic disorder and lead to more finely structured and perhaps more accurate
predictions. HMMs could be trained to include this information.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.25724 
PMCID: PMC5424788
PMID: 28516017 


68. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Apr 1;1(1):e25496. doi: 10.4161/idp.25496.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

Digested disorder: Quarterly intrinsic disorder digest (January/February/March,
2013).

Uversky VN(1)(2).

The current literature on intrinsically disordered proteins is blooming. A simple
PubMed search for "intrinsically disordered protein OR natively unfolded protein"
returns about 1,800 hits (as of June 17, 2013), with many papers published quite 
recently. To keep interested readers up to speed with this literature, we are
starting a "Digested Disorder" project, which will encompass a series of reader's
digest type of publications aiming at the objective representation of the
research papers and reviews on intrinsically disordered proteins. The only two
criteria for inclusion in this digest are the publication date (a paper should be
published within the covered time frame) and topic (a paper should be dedicated
to any aspect of protein intrinsic disorder). The current digest covers papers
published during the period of January, February and March of 2013. The papers
are grouped hierarchically by topics they cover, and for each of the included
paper a short description is given on its major findings.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.25496 
PMCID: PMC5424799
PMID: 28516015 


69. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Apr 1;1(1):e25068. doi: 10.4161/idp.25068.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

Extracting structural information from charge-state distributions of
intrinsically disordered proteins by non-denaturing electrospray-ionization mass 
spectrometry.

Testa L(1), Brocca S(1), Santambrogio C(1), D'Urzo A(1), Habchi J(2), Longhi
S(2), Uversky VN(3)(4), Grandori R(1).

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) exert key biological functions but tend 
to escape identification and characterization due to their high structural
dynamics and heterogeneity. The possibility to dissect conformational ensembles
by electrospray-ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) offers an attracting
possibility to develop a signature for this class of proteins based on their
peculiar ionization behavior. This review summarizes available data on
charge-state distributions (CSDs) obtained for IDPs by non-denaturing ESI-MS,
with reference to globular or chemically denatured proteins. The results
illustrate the contributions that direct ESI-MS analysis can give to the
identification of new putative IDPs and to their conformational investigation.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.25068 
PMCID: PMC5424789
PMID: 28516012 


70. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Apr 1;1(1):e24848. doi: 10.4161/idp.24848.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

Functional fragments of disorder in outer membrane β barrel proteins.

Kurup K(1), Dunker AK(2), Krishnaswamy S(1).

The traditional view of "sequence-structure-function" has been amended by the
discovery of intrinsically disordered proteins. Almost 50% of PDB structures are 
now known to have one or more regions of disorder, which are involved in diverse 
functions. These regions typically possess low aromatic content and sequence
complexity as well as high net charge and flexibility. In this study, we examined
the composition and contribution of intrinsic disorder in outer membrane β barrel
protein functions. Our systematic analysis to find the dual personality (DP)
fragments, which often function by disorder-order transitions, revealed the
presence of 61 DP fragments with 234 residues in β barrel trans membrane protein 
structures. It was found that though the disorder is more prevalent in the
periplasmic regions, most of the residues which undergo disorder-order
transitions are found in the extracellular regions. For example, the calcium
binding sites in BtuB protein are found to undergo disorder to order transition
upon binding calcium. The conformational change in the cell receptor binding site
of the OpcA protein, which is important in host cell interactions of N.
meningitidis, was also found to be due to the disorder-order transitions
occurring in the presence of the ligand. The natively disordered nature of DP
fragments makes it more appropriate to call them "functional fragments of
disorder." The present study provides insight into the roles played by
intrinsically disordered regions in outer membrane protein functions.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.24848 
PMCID: PMC5424791
PMID: 28516011 


71. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Apr 1;1(1):e24684. doi: 10.4161/idp.24684.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

The alphabet of intrinsic disorder: II. Various roles of glutamic acid in ordered
and intrinsically disordered proteins.

Uversky VN(1)(2).

The ability of a protein to fold into unique functional state or to stay
intrinsically disordered is encoded in its amino acid sequence. Both ordered and 
intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are natural polypeptides that use the
same arsenal of 20 proteinogenic amino acid residues as their major building
blocks. The exceptional structural plasticity of IDPs, their capability to exist 
as heterogeneous structural ensembles and their wide array of important
disorder-based biological functions that complements functional repertoire of
ordered proteins are all rooted within the peculiar differential usage of these
building blocks by ordered proteins and IDPs. In fact, some residues (so-called
disorder-promoting residues) are noticeably more common in IDPs than in sequences
of ordered proteins, which, in their turn, are enriched in several
order-promoting residues. Furthermore, residues can be arranged according to
their "disorder promoting potencies," which are evaluated based on the relative
abundances of various amino acids in ordered and disordered proteins. This review
continues a series of publications on the roles of different amino acids in
defining the phenomenon of protein intrinsic disorder and concerns glutamic acid,
which is the second most disorder-promoting residue.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.24684 
PMCID: PMC5424795
PMID: 28516010 


72. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Apr 1;1(1):e24360. doi: 10.4161/idp.24360.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

The alphabet of intrinsic disorder: I. Act like a Pro: On the abundance and roles
of proline residues in intrinsically disordered proteins.

Theillet FX(1), Kalmar L(2), Tompa P(2)(3), Han KH(4)(5), Selenko P(1), Dunker
AK(6), Daughdrill GW(7), Uversky VN(8)(9).

A significant fraction of every proteome is occupied by biologically active
proteins that do not form unique three-dimensional structures. These
intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and IDP regions (IDPRs) have essential
biological functions and are characterized by extensive structural plasticity.
Such structural and functional behavior is encoded in the amino acid sequences of
IDPs/IDPRs, which are enriched in disorder-promoting residues and depleted in
order-promoting residues. In fact, amino acid residues can be arranged according 
to their disorder-promoting tendency to form an alphabet of intrinsic disorder
that defines the structural complexity and diversity of IDPs/IDPRs. This review
is the first in a series of publications dedicated to the roles that different
amino acid residues play in defining the phenomenon of protein intrinsic
disorder. We start with proline because data suggests that of the 20 common amino
acid residues, this one is the most disorder-promoting.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.24360 
PMCID: PMC5424786
PMID: 28516008 


73. Protein Sci. 2013 Mar;22(3):258-73. doi: 10.1002/pro.2207. Epub 2013 Jan 27.

Exploring the binding diversity of intrinsically disordered proteins involved in 
one-to-many binding.

Hsu WL(1), Oldfield CJ, Xue B, Meng J, Huang F, Romero P, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Molecular recognition features (MoRFs) are intrinsically disordered protein
regions that bind to partners via disorder-to-order transitions. In one-to-many
binding, a single MoRF binds to two or more different partners individually.
MoRF-based one-to-many protein-protein interaction (PPI) examples were collected 
from the Protein Data Bank, yielding 23 MoRFs bound to 2-9 partners, with all
pairs of same-MoRF partners having less than 25% sequence identity. Of these, 8
MoRFs were bound to 2-9 partners having completely different folds, whereas 15
MoRFs were bound to 2-5 partners having the same folds but with low sequence
identities. For both types of partner variation, backbone and side chain torsion 
angle rotations were used to bring about the conformational changes needed to
enable close fits between a single MoRF and distinct partners. Alternative
splicing events (ASEs) and posttranslational modifications (PTMs) were also found
to contribute to distinct partner binding. Because ASEs and PTMs both commonly
occur in disordered regions, and because both ASEs and PTMs are often
tissue-specific, these data suggest that MoRFs, ASEs, and PTMs may collaborate to
alter PPI networks in different cell types. These data enlarge the set of
carefully studied MoRFs that use inherent flexibility and that also use ASE-based
and/or PTM-based surface modifications to enable the same disordered segment to
selectively associate with two or more partners. The small number of residues
involved in MoRFs and in their modifications by ASEs or PTMs may simplify the
evolvability of signaling network diversity.

Copyright © 2013 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2207 
PMCID: PMC3595456
PMID: 23233352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PeerJ. 2013 Feb 12;1:e2. doi: 10.7717/peerj.2. Print 2013.

Malleable ribonucleoprotein machine: protein intrinsic disorder in the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae spliceosome.

Coelho Ribeiro Mde L(1), Espinosa J, Islam S, Martinez O, Thanki JJ, Mazariegos
S, Nguyen T, Larina M, Xue B, Uversky VN.

Recent studies revealed that a significant fraction of any given proteome is
presented by proteins that do not have unique 3D structures as a whole or in
significant parts. These intrinsically disordered proteins possess dramatic
structural and functional variability, being especially enriched in signaling and
regulatory functions since their lack of fixed structure defines their ability to
be involved in interaction with several proteins and allows them to be re-used in
multiple pathways. Among recognized disorder-based protein functions are
interactions with nucleic acids and multi-target binding; i.e., the functions
ascribed to many spliceosomal proteins. Therefore, the spliceosome, a
multimegadalton ribonucleoprotein machine catalyzing the excision of introns from
eukaryotic pre-mRNAs, represents an attractive target for the focused analysis of
the abundance and functionality of intrinsic disorder in its proteinaceous
components. In yeast cells, spliceosome consists of five small nuclear RNAs (U1, 
U2, U4, U5, and U6) and a range of associated proteins. Some of these proteins
constitute cores of the corresponding snRNA-protein complexes known as small
nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs). Other spliceosomal proteins have various
auxiliary functions. To gain better understanding of the functional roles of
intrinsic disorder, we have studied the prevalence of intrinsically disordered
proteins in the yeast spliceosome using a wide array of bioinformatics methods.
Our study revealed that similar to the proteins associated with human
spliceosomes (Korneta & Bujnicki, 2012), proteins found in the yeast spliceosome 
are enriched in intrinsic disorder.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.2 
PMCID: PMC3628832
PMID: 23638354 


75. Genome Biol Evol. 2013;5(3):504-13. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evt026.

Rapid evolutionary dynamics of structural disorder as a potential driving force
for biological divergence in flaviviruses.

Ortiz JF(1), MacDonald ML, Masterson P, Uversky VN, Siltberg-Liberles J.

Protein structure is commonly regarded to be conserved and to dictate function.
Most proteins rely on conformational flexibility to some degree. Are regions that
convey conformational flexibility conserved over evolutionary time? Can changes
in conformational flexibility alter protein function? Here, the evolutionary
dynamics of structurally ordered and disordered (flexible) regions are
investigated genome-wide in flaviviruses, revealing that the amount and location 
of structural disorder fluctuates highly among related proteins. Some regions are
prone to shift between structured and flexible states. Increased evolutionary
dynamics of structural disorder is observed for some lineages but not in others. 
Lineage-specific transitions of this kind could alter the conformational ensemble
accessible to the same protein in different species, causing a functional change,
even if the predominant function remains conserved. Thus, rapid evolutionary
dynamics of structural disorder is a potential driving force for phenotypic
divergence among flaviviruses.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evt026 
PMCID: PMC3622304
PMID: 23418179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Intrinsically Disord Proteins. 2013 Jan 1;1(1):e27454. doi: 10.4161/idp.27454.
eCollection 2013 Jan-Dec.

Digested disorder: Quarterly intrinsic disorder digest (April-May-June, 2013).

DeForte S(1), Reddy KD(1), Uversky VN(1)(2)(3).

The current literature on intrinsically disordered proteins is overwhelming. To
keep interested readers up to speed with this literature, we continue a "Digested
Disorder" project and represent a series of reader's digest type articles
objectively representing the research papers and reviews on intrinsically
disordered proteins. The only 2 criteria for inclusion in this digest are the
publication date (a paper should be published within the covered time frame) and 
topic (a paper should be dedicated to any aspect of protein intrinsic disorder). 
The current digest issue covers papers published during the period of April, May,
and June of 2013. The papers are grouped hierarchically by topics they cover, and
for each of the included paper a short description is given on its major
findings.

DOI: 10.4161/idp.27454 
PMCID: PMC5424790
PMID: 28516028 


77. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(7):e1003144. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003144. Epub
2013 Jul 18.

Structural disorder provides increased adaptability for vesicle trafficking
pathways.

Pietrosemoli N(1), Pancsa R, Tompa P.

Vesicle trafficking systems play essential roles in the communication between the
organelles of eukaryotic cells and also between cells and their environment.
Endocytosis and the late secretory route are mediated by clathrin-coated
vesicles, while the COat Protein I and II (COPI and COPII) routes stand for the
bidirectional traffic between the ER and the Golgi apparatus. Despite similar
fundamental organizations, the molecular machinery, functions, and evolutionary
characteristics of the three systems are very different. In this work, we
compiled the basic functional protein groups of the three main routes for human
and yeast and analyzed them from the structural disorder perspective. We found
similar overall disorder content in yeast and human proteins, confirming the
well-conserved nature of these systems. Most functional groups contain highly
disordered proteins, supporting the general importance of structural disorder in 
these routes, although some of them seem to heavily rely on disorder, while
others do not. Interestingly, the clathrin system is significantly more
disordered (~23%) than the other two, COPI (~9%) and COPII (~8%). We show that
this structural phenomenon enhances the inherent plasticity and increased
evolutionary adaptability of the clathrin system, which distinguishes it from the
other two routes. Since multi-functionality (moonlighting) is indicative of both 
plasticity and adaptability, we studied its prevalence in vesicle trafficking
proteins and correlated it with structural disorder. Clathrin adaptors have the
highest capability for moonlighting while also comprising the most highly
disordered members. The ability to acquire tissue specific functions was also
used to approach adaptability: clathrin route genes have the most tissue specific
exons encoding for protein segments enriched in structural disorder and
interaction sites. Overall, our results confirm the general importance of
structural disorder in vesicle trafficking and suggest major roles for this
structural property in shaping the differences of evolutionary adaptability in
the three routes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003144 
PMCID: PMC3715437
PMID: 23874186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57354. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057354. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

Actinidia DRM1--an intrinsically disordered protein whose mRNA expression is
inversely correlated with spring budbreak in kiwifruit.

Wood M(1), Rae GM, Wu RM, Walton EF, Xue B, Hellens RP, Uversky VN.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are a relatively recently defined class 
of proteins which, under native conditions, lack a unique tertiary structure
whilst maintaining essential biological functions. Functional classification of
IDPs have implicated such proteins as being involved in various physiological
processes including transcription and translation regulation, signal transduction
and protein modification. Actinidia DRM1 (Ade DORMANCY ASSOCIATED GENE 1),
represents a robust dormancy marker whose mRNA transcript expression exhibits a
strong inverse correlation with the onset of growth following periods of
physiological dormancy. Bioinformatic analyses suggest that DRM1 is plant
specific and highly conserved at both the nucleotide and protein levels. It is
predicted to be an intrinsically disordered protein with two distinct highly
conserved domains. Several Actinidia DRM1 homologues, which align into two
distinct Actinidia-specific families, Type I and Type II, have been identified.
No candidates for the Arabidopsis DRM1-Homologue (AtDRM2) an additional family
member, has been identified in Actinidia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057354 
PMCID: PMC3596386
PMID: 23516402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055524. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Genome-wide analysis of protein disorder in Arabidopsis thaliana: implications
for plant environmental adaptation.

Pietrosemoli N(1), García-Martín JA, Solano R, Pazos F.

Intrinsically disordered proteins/regions (IDPs/IDRs) are currently recognized as
a widespread phenomenon having key cellular functions. Still, many aspects of the
function of these proteins need to be unveiled. IDPs conformational flexibility
allows them to recognize and interact with multiple partners, and confers them
larger interaction surfaces that may increase interaction speed. For this reason,
molecular interactions mediated by IDPs/IDRs are particularly abundant in certain
types of protein interactions, such as those of signaling and cell cycle control.
We present the first large-scale study of IDPs in Arabidopsis thaliana, the most 
widely used model organism in plant biology, in order to get insight into the
biological roles of these proteins in plants. The work includes a comparative
analysis with the human proteome to highlight the differential use of disorder in
both species. Results show that while human proteins are in general more
disordered, certain functional classes, mainly related to environmental response,
are significantly more enriched in disorder in Arabidopsis. We propose that
because plants cannot escape from environmental conditions as animals do, they
use disorder as a simple and fast mechanism, independent of transcriptional
control, for introducing versatility in the interaction networks underlying these
biological processes so that they can quickly adapt and respond to challenging
environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055524 
PMCID: PMC3567104
PMID: 23408995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Struct Biol. 2012 Oct;180(1):201-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2012.05.013. Epub 2012 
May 29.

High-throughput characterization of intrinsic disorder in proteins from the
Protein Structure Initiative.

Johnson DE(1), Xue B, Sickmeier MD, Meng J, Cortese MS, Oldfield CJ, Le Gall T,
Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

The identification of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) among the targets 
that fail to form satisfactory crystal structures in the Protein Structure
Initiative represents a key to reducing the costs and time for determining
three-dimensional structures of proteins. To help in this endeavor, several
Protein Structure Initiative Centers were asked to send samples of both
crystallizable proteins and proteins that failed to crystallize. The abundance of
intrinsic disorder in these proteins was evaluated via computational analysis
using predictors of natural disordered regions (PONDR®) and the potential
cleavage sites and corresponding fragments were determined. Then, the target
proteins were analyzed for intrinsic disorder by their resistance to limited
proteolysis. The rates of tryptic digestion of sample target proteins were
compared to those of lysozyme/myoglobin, apomyoglobin, and α-casein as standards 
of ordered, partially disordered and completely disordered proteins,
respectively. At the next stage, the protein samples were subjected to both
far-UV and near-UV circular dichroism (CD) analysis. For most of the samples, a
good agreement between CD data, predictions of disorder and the rates of limited 
tryptic digestion was established. Further experimentation is being performed on 
a smaller subset of these samples in order to obtain more detailed information on
the ordered/disordered nature of the proteins.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2012.05.013 
PMCID: PMC3578346
PMID: 22651963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 11;287(20):16541-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.343863. Epub 2012
Mar 14.

Human cyclin-dependent kinase 2-associated protein 1 (CDK2AP1) is dimeric in its 
disulfide-reduced state, with natively disordered N-terminal region.

Ertekin A(1), Aramini JM, Rossi P, Leonard PG, Janjua H, Xiao R, Maglaqui M, Lee 
HW, Prestegard JH, Montelione GT.

CDK2AP1 (cyclin-dependent kinase 2-associated protein 1), corresponding to the
gene doc-1 (deleted in oral cancer 1), is a tumor suppressor protein. The doc-1
gene is absent or down-regulated in hamster oral cancer cells and in many other
cancer cell types. The ubiquitously expressed CDK2AP1 protein is the only known
specific inhibitor of CDK2, making it an important component of cell cycle
regulation during G(1)-to-S phase transition. Here, we report the solution
structure of CDK2AP1 by combined methods of solution state NMR and amide
hydrogen/deuterium exchange measurements with mass spectrometry. The homodimeric 
structure of CDK2AP1 includes an intrinsically disordered 60-residue N-terminal
region and a four-helix bundle dimeric structure with reduced Cys-105 in the
C-terminal region. The Cys-105 residues are, however, poised for disulfide bond
formation. CDK2AP1 is phosphorylated at a conserved Ser-46 site in the N-terminal
"intrinsically disordered" region by IκB kinase ε.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.343863 
PMCID: PMC3351331
PMID: 22427660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2012 Feb;13(1):55-75.

How random are intrinsically disordered proteins? A small angle scattering
perspective.

Receveur-Brechot V(1), Durand D.

While the crucial role of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) in the cell
cycle is now recognized, deciphering their molecular mode of action at the
structural level still remains highly challenging and requires a combination of
many biophysical approaches. Among them, small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) has 
been extremely successful in the last decade and has become an indispensable
technique for addressing many of the fundamental questions regarding the
activities of IDPs. After introducing some experimental issues specific to IDPs
and in relation to the latest technical developments, this article presents the
interest of the theory of polymer physics to evaluate the flexibility of fully
disordered proteins. The different strategies to obtain 3-dimensional models of
IDPs, free in solution and associated in a complex, are then reviewed. Indeed,
recent computational advances have made it possible to readily extract maximum
information from the scattering curve with a special emphasis on highly flexible 
systems, such as multidomain proteins and IDPs. Furthermore, integrated
computational approaches now enable the generation of ensembles of conformers to 
translate the unique flexible characteristics of IDPs by taking into
consideration the constraints of more and more various complementary experiment. 
In particular, a combination of SAXS with high-resolution techniques, such as
x-ray crystallography and NMR, allows us to provide reliable models and to gain
unique structural insights about the protein over multiple structural scales. The
latest neutron scattering experiments also promise new advances in the study of
the conformational changes of macromolecules involving more complex systems.

© 2012 Bentham Science Publishers


PMCID: PMC3394175
PMID: 22044150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2012;29(4):799-813.

SPINE-D: accurate prediction of short and long disordered regions by a single
neural-network based method.

Zhang T(1), Faraggi E, Xue B, Dunker AK, Uversky VN, Zhou Y.

Short and long disordered regions of proteins have different preference for
different amino acid residues. Different methods often have to be trained to
predict them separately. In this study, we developed a single
neural-network-based technique called SPINE-D that makes a three-state prediction
first (ordered residues and disordered residues in short and long disordered
regions) and reduces it into a two-state prediction afterwards. SPINE-D was
tested on various sets composed of different combinations of Disprot annotated
proteins and proteins directly from the PDB annotated for disorder by missing
coordinates in X-ray determined structures. While disorder annotations are
different according to Disprot and X-ray approaches, SPINE-D's prediction
accuracy and ability to predict disorder are relatively independent of how the
method was trained and what type of annotation was employed but strongly depend
on the balance in the relative populations of ordered and disordered residues in 
short and long disordered regions in the test set. With greater than 85% overall 
specificity for detecting residues in both short and long disordered regions, the
residues in long disordered regions are easier to predict at 81% sensitivity in a
balanced test dataset with 56.5% ordered residues but more challenging (at 65%
sensitivity) in a test dataset with 90% ordered residues. Compared to eleven
other methods, SPINE-D yields the highest area under the curve (AUC), the highest
Mathews correlation coefficient for residue-based prediction, and the lowest mean
square error in predicting disorder contents of proteins for an independent test 
set with 329 proteins. In particular, SPINE-D is comparable to a meta predictor
in predicting disordered residues in long disordered regions and superior in
short disordered regions. SPINE-D participated in CASP 9 blind prediction and is 
one of the top servers according to the official ranking. In addition, SPINE-D
was examined for prediction of functional molecular recognition motifs in several
case studies.

DOI: 10.1080/073911012010525022 
PMCID: PMC3297974
PMID: 22208280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Jan;8(1):27-32. doi: 10.1039/c1mb05251a. Epub 2011 Nov 14.

Disease mutations in disordered regions--exception to the rule?

Vacic V(1), Iakoucheva LM.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) have been implicated in a number of
human diseases, including cancer, diabetes, neurodegenerative and cardiovascular 
disorders. Although for some of these conditions molecular mechanisms are now
better understood, the big picture connecting distinct structural properties and 
functional repertoire of IDPs to pathogenesis and disease progression is still
incomplete. Recent studies suggest that signaling and regulatory roles carried
out by IDPs require them to be tightly regulated, and that altered IDP abundance 
may lead to disease. Here, we propose another link between IDPs and disease that 
takes into account disease-associated missense mutations located in the
intrinsically disordered regions. We argue that such mutations are more prevalent
and have larger functional impact than previously thought. In addition, we
demonstrate that deleterious amino acid substitutions that cause
disorder-to-order transitions are particularly enriched among disease mutations
compared to neutral polymorphisms. Finally, we discuss potential differences in
functional outcomes between disease mutations in ordered and disordered regions, 
and challenge the conventional structure-centric view of missense mutations.

DOI: 10.1039/c1mb05251a 
PMCID: PMC3307532
PMID: 22080206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Jan;8(1):320-6. doi: 10.1039/c1mb05274h. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Intrinsic protein disorder in human pathways.

Fong JH(1), Shoemaker BA, Panchenko AR.

We analyze human-specific KEGG pathways trying to understand the functional role 
of intrinsic disorder in proteins. Pathways provide a comprehensive picture of
biological processes and allow better understanding of a protein's function
within the specific context of its surroundings. Our study pinpoints a few
specific pathways significantly enriched in disorder-containing proteins and
identifies the role of these proteins within the framework of pathway
relationships. Three major categories of relations are shown to be significantly 
enriched in disordered proteins: gene expression, protein binding and to a lesser
degree, protein phosphorylation. Finally we find that relations involving protein
activation and to some extent inhibition are characterized by low disorder
content.

DOI: 10.1039/c1mb05274h 
PMCID: PMC3584708
PMID: 22012032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(10):e1002709. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002709. Epub
2012 Oct 4.

Disease-associated mutations disrupt functionally important regions of intrinsic 
protein disorder.

Vacic V(1), Markwick PR, Oldfield CJ, Zhao X, Haynes C, Uversky VN, Iakoucheva
LM.

The effects of disease mutations on protein structure and function have been
extensively investigated, and many predictors of the functional impact of single 
amino acid substitutions are publicly available. The majority of these predictors
are based on protein structure and evolutionary conservation, following the
assumption that disease mutations predominantly affect folded and conserved
protein regions. However, the prevalence of the intrinsically disordered proteins
(IDPs) and regions (IDRs) in the human proteome together with their lack of fixed
structure and low sequence conservation raise a question about the impact of
disease mutations in IDRs. Here, we investigate annotated missense disease
mutations and show that 21.7% of them are located within such intrinsically
disordered regions. We further demonstrate that 20% of disease mutations in IDRs 
cause local disorder-to-order transitions, which represents a 1.7-2.7 fold
increase compared to annotated polymorphisms and neutral evolutionary
substitutions, respectively. Secondary structure predictions show elevated rates 
of transition from helices and strands into loops and vice versa in the disease
mutations dataset. Disease disorder-to-order mutations also influence predicted
molecular recognition features (MoRFs) more often than the control mutations. The
repertoire of disorder-to-order transition mutations is limited, with five most
frequent mutations (R→W, R→C, E→K, R→H, R→Q) collectively accounting for 44% of
all deleterious disorder-to-order transitions. As a proof of concept, we
performed accelerated molecular dynamics simulations on a deleterious
disorder-to-order transition mutation of tumor protein p63 and, in agreement with
our predictions, observed an increased α-helical propensity of the region
harboring the mutation. Our findings highlight the importance of mutations in
IDRs and refine the traditional structure-centric view of disease mutations. The 
results of this study offer a new perspective on the role of mutations in
disease, with implications for improving predictors of the functional impact of
missense mutations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002709 
PMCID: PMC3464192
PMID: 23055912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(8):e1002641. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002641. Epub
2012 Aug 9.

Intrinsic disorder in the human spliceosomal proteome.

Korneta I(1), Bujnicki JM.

The spliceosome is a molecular machine that performs the excision of introns from
eukaryotic pre-mRNAs. This macromolecular complex comprises in human cells five
RNAs and over one hundred proteins. In recent years, many spliceosomal proteins
have been found to exhibit intrinsic disorder, that is to lack stable native
three-dimensional structure in solution. Building on the previous body of
proteomic, structural and functional data, we have carried out a systematic
bioinformatics analysis of intrinsic disorder in the proteome of the human
spliceosome. We discovered that almost a half of the combined sequence of
proteins abundant in the spliceosome is predicted to be intrinsically disordered,
at least when the individual proteins are considered in isolation. The
distribution of intrinsic order and disorder throughout the spliceosome is
uneven, and is related to the various functions performed by the intrinsic
disorder of the spliceosomal proteins in the complex. In particular, proteins
involved in the secondary functions of the spliceosome, such as mRNA recognition,
intron/exon definition and spliceosomal assembly and dynamics, are more
disordered than proteins directly involved in assisting splicing catalysis.
Conserved disordered regions in spliceosomal proteins are evolutionarily younger 
and less widespread than ordered domains of essential spliceosomal proteins at
the core of the spliceosome, suggesting that disordered regions were added to a
preexistent ordered functional core. Finally, the spliceosomal proteome contains 
a much higher amount of intrinsic disorder predicted to lack secondary structure 
than the proteome of the ribosome, another large RNP machine. This result agrees 
with the currently recognized different functions of proteins in these two
complexes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002641 
PMCID: PMC3415423
PMID: 22912569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51415. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051415. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

Identification of HYPK-interacting proteins reveals involvement of HYPK in
regulating cell growth, cell cycle, unfolded protein response and cell death.

Choudhury KR(1), Raychaudhuri S, Bhattacharyya NP.

Huntingtin Yeast Two-Hybrid Protein K (HYPK) is an intrinsically unstructured
huntingtin (HTT)-interacting protein with chaperone-like activity. To obtain more
information about the function(s) of the protein, we identified 27 novel
interacting partners of HYPK by pull-down assay coupled with mass spectrometry
and, further, 9 proteins were identified by co-localization and
co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assays. In neuronal cells, (EEF1A1 and HSPA1A),
(HTT and LMNB2) and (TP53 and RELA) were identified in complex with HYPK in
different experiments. Various Gene Ontology (GO) terms for biological processes,
like protein folding (GO: 0006457), response to unfolded protein (GO: 0006986),
cell cycle arrest (GO: 0007050), anti-apoptosis (GO: 0006916) and regulation of
transcription (GO: 0006355) were significantly enriched with the HYPK-interacting
proteins. Cell growth and the ability to refold heat-denatured reporter
luciferase were decreased, but cytotoxicity was increased in neuronal cells where
HYPK was knocked-down using HYPK antisense DNA construct. The proportion of cells
in different phases of cell cycle was also altered in cells with reduced levels
of HYPK. These results show that HYPK is involved in several biological
processes, possibly through interaction with its partners.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051415 
PMCID: PMC3525516
PMID: 23272104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46829. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046829. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Disordered binding regions and linear motifs--bridging the gap between two models
of molecular recognition.

Mészáros B(1), Dosztányi Z, Simon I.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) exist without the presence of a stable
tertiary structure in isolation. These proteins are often involved in molecular
recognition processes via their disordered binding regions that can recognize
partner molecules by undergoing a coupled folding and binding process. The
specific properties of disordered binding regions give way to specific, yet
transient interactions that enable IDPs to play central roles in signaling
pathways and act as hubs of protein interaction networks. An alternative model of
protein-protein interactions with largely overlapping functional properties is
offered by the concept of linear interaction motifs. This approach focuses on
distilling a short consensus sequence pattern from proteins with a common
interaction partner. These motifs often reside in disordered regions and are
considered to mediate the interaction roughly independent from the rest of the
protein. Although a connection between linear motifs and disordered binding
regions has been established through common examples, the complementary nature of
the two concepts has yet to be fully explored. In many cases the sequence based
definition of linear motifs and the structural context based definition of
disordered binding regions describe two aspects of the same phenomenon. To gain
insight into the connection between the two models, prediction methods were
utilized. We combined the regular expression based prediction of linear motifs
with the disordered binding region prediction method ANCHOR, each specialized for
either model to get the best of both worlds. The thorough analysis of the overlap
of the two methods offers a bioinformatics tool for more efficient binding site
prediction that can serve a wide range of practical implications. At the same
time it can also shed light on the theoretical connection between the two
co-existing interaction models.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046829 
PMCID: PMC3463566
PMID: 23056474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36968. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036968. Epub 2012 May 16.

Computational and statistical analyses of amino acid usage and physico-chemical
properties of the twelve late embryogenesis abundant protein classes.

Jaspard E(1), Macherel D, Hunault G.

Late Embryogenesis Abundant Proteins (LEAPs) are ubiquitous proteins expected to 
play major roles in desiccation tolerance. Little is known about their structure 
- function relationships because of the scarcity of 3-D structures for LEAPs. The
previous building of LEAPdb, a database dedicated to LEAPs from plants and other 
organisms, led to the classification of 710 LEAPs into 12 non-overlapping classes
with distinct properties. Using this resource, numerous physico-chemical
properties of LEAPs and amino acid usage by LEAPs have been computed and
statistically analyzed, revealing distinctive features for each class. This
unprecedented analysis allowed a rigorous characterization of the 12 LEAP
classes, which differed also in multiple structural and physico-chemical
features. Although most LEAPs can be predicted as intrinsically disordered
proteins, the analysis indicates that LEAP class 7 (PF03168) and probably LEAP
class 11 (PF04927) are natively folded proteins. This study thus provides a
detailed description of the structural properties of this protein family opening 
the path toward further LEAP structure - function analysis. Finally, since each
LEAP class can be clearly characterized by a unique set of physico-chemical
properties, this will allow development of software to predict proteins as LEAPs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036968 
PMCID: PMC3353982
PMID: 22615859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e30534. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030534. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Inherent structural disorder and dimerisation of murine norovirus NS1-2 protein.

Baker ES(1), Luckner SR, Krause KL, Lambden PR, Clarke IN, Ward VK.

Human noroviruses are highly infectious viruses that cause the majority of acute,
non-bacterial epidemic gastroenteritis cases worldwide. The first open reading
frame of the norovirus RNA genome encodes for a polyprotein that is cleaved by
the viral protease into six non-structural proteins. The first non-structural
protein, NS1-2, lacks any significant sequence similarity to other viral or
cellular proteins and limited information is available about the function and
biophysical characteristics of this protein. Bioinformatic analyses identified an
inherently disordered region (residues 1-142) in the highly divergent N-terminal 
region of the norovirus NS1-2 protein. Expression and purification of the NS1-2
protein of Murine norovirus confirmed these predictions by identifying several
features typical of an inherently disordered protein. These were a biased amino
acid composition with enrichment in the disorder promoting residues serine and
proline, a lack of predicted secondary structure, a hydrophilic nature, an
aberrant electrophoretic migration, an increased Stokes radius similar to that
predicted for a protein from the pre-molten globule family, a high sensitivity to
thermolysin proteolysis and a circular dichroism spectrum typical of an
inherently disordered protein. The purification of the NS1-2 protein also
identified the presence of an NS1-2 dimer in Escherichia coli and transfected
HEK293T cells. Inherent disorder provides significant advantages including
structural flexibility and the ability to bind to numerous targets allowing a
single protein to have multiple functions. These advantages combined with the
potential functional advantages of multimerisation suggest a multi-functional
role for the NS1-2 protein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030534 
PMCID: PMC3274520
PMID: 22347381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Proteome Sci. 2011 Oct 14;9 Suppl 1:S12. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-9-S1-S12.

Unsupervised Integration of Multiple Protein Disorder Predictors: The Method and 
Evaluation on CASP7, CASP8 and CASP9 Data.

Zhang P(1), Obradovic Z.

BACKGROUND: Studies of intrinsically disordered proteins that lack a stable
tertiary structure but still have important biological functions critically rely 
on computational methods that predict this property based on sequence
information. Although a number of fairly successful models for prediction of
protein disorder have been developed over the last decade, the quality of their
predictions is limited by available cases of confirmed disorders.
RESULTS: To more reliably estimate protein disorder from protein sequences, an
iterative algorithm is proposed that integrates predictions of multiple disorder 
models without relying on any protein sequences with confirmed disorder
annotation. The iterative method alternately provides the maximum a posterior
(MAP) estimation of disorder prediction and the maximum-likelihood (ML)
estimation of quality of multiple disorder predictors. Experiments on data used
at CASP7, CASP8, and CASP9 have shown the effectiveness of the proposed
algorithm.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed algorithm can potentially be used to predict protein
disorder and provide helpful suggestions on choosing suitable disorder predictors
for unknown protein sequences.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-5956-9-S1-S12 
PMCID: PMC3289073
PMID: 22166115 


93. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Aug;1814(8):1021-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2011.01.011.
Epub 2011 Feb 17.

Protein folding at single-molecule resolution.

Ferreon AC(1), Deniz AA.

The protein folding reaction carries great significance for cellular function and
hence continues to be the research focus of a large interdisciplinary protein
science community. Single-molecule methods are providing new and powerful tools
for dissecting the mechanisms of this complex process by virtue of their ability 
to provide views of protein structure and dynamics without associated ensemble
averaging. This review briefly introduces common FRET and force methods, and then
explores several areas of protein folding where single-molecule experiments have 
yielded insights. These include exciting new information about folding
landscapes, dynamics, intermediates, unfolded ensembles, intrinsically disordered
proteins, assisted folding and biomechanical unfolding. Emerging and future work 
is expected to include advances in single-molecule techniques aimed at such
investigations, and increasing work on more complex systems from both the physics
and biology standpoints, including folding and dynamics of systems of interacting
proteins and of proteins in cells and organisms. This article is part of a
Special Issue entitled: Protein Dynamics: Experimental and Computational
Approaches.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2011.01.011 
PMCID: PMC3114273
PMID: 21303706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. BMC Struct Biol. 2011 Jun 22;11:29. doi: 10.1186/1472-6807-11-29.

Binary classification of protein molecules into intrinsically disordered and
ordered segments.

Fukuchi S(1), Hosoda K, Homma K, Gojobori T, Nishikawa K.

BACKGROUND: Although structural domains in proteins (SDs) are important, half of 
the regions in the human proteome are currently left with no SD assignments.
These unassigned regions consist not only of novel SDs, but also of intrinsically
disordered (ID) regions since proteins, especially those in eukaryotes, generally
contain a significant fraction of ID regions. As ID regions can be inferred from 
amino acid sequences, a method that combines SD and ID region assignments can
determine the fractions of SDs and ID regions in any proteome.
RESULTS: In contrast to other available ID prediction programs that merely
identify likely ID regions, the DICHOT system we previously developed classifies 
the entire protein sequence into SDs and ID regions. Application of DICHOT to the
human proteome revealed that residue-wise ID regions constitute 35%, SDs with
similarity to PDB structures comprise 52%, while SDs with no similarity to PDB
structures account for the remaining 13%. The last group consists of novel
structural domains, termed cryptic domains, which serve as good targets of
structural genomics. The DICHOT method applied to the proteomes of other model
organisms indicated that eukaryotes generally have high ID contents, while
prokaryotes do not. In human proteins, ID contents differ among subcellular
localizations: nuclear proteins had the highest residue-wise ID fraction (47%),
while mitochondrial proteins exhibited the lowest (13%). Phosphorylation and
O-linked glycosylation sites were found to be located preferentially in ID
regions. As O-linked glycans are attached to residues in the extracellular
regions of proteins, the modification is likely to protect the ID regions from
proteolytic cleavage in the extracellular environment. Alternative splicing
events tend to occur more frequently in ID regions. We interpret this as evidence
that natural selection is operating at the protein level in alternative splicing.
CONCLUSIONS: We classified entire regions of proteins into the two categories,
SDs and ID regions and thereby obtained various kinds of complete genome-wide
statistics. The results of the present study are important basic information for 
understanding protein structural architectures and have been made publicly
available at http://spock.genes.nig.ac.jp/~genome/DICHOT.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6807-11-29 
PMCID: PMC3199747
PMID: 21693062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Jun 17;12:245. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-245.

In-silico prediction of disorder content using hybrid sequence representation.

Mizianty MJ(1), Zhang T, Xue B, Zhou Y, Dunker AK, Uversky VN, Kurgan L.

BACKGROUND: Intrinsically disordered proteins play important roles in various
cellular activities and their prevalence was implicated in a number of human
diseases. The knowledge of the content of the intrinsic disorder in proteins is
useful for a variety of studies including estimation of the abundance of disorder
in protein families, classes, and complete proteomes, and for the analysis of
disorder-related protein functions. The above investigations currently utilize
the disorder content derived from the per-residue disorder predictions. We show
that these predictions may over-or under-predict the overall amount of disorder, 
which motivates development of novel tools for direct and accurate sequence-based
prediction of the disorder content.
RESULTS: We hypothesize that sequence-level aggregation of input information may 
provide more accurate content prediction when compared with the content extracted
from the local window-based residue-level disorder predictors. We propose a novel
predictor, DisCon, that takes advantage of a small set of 29 custom-designed
descriptors that aggregate and hybridize information concerning sequence,
evolutionary profiles, and predicted secondary structure, solvent accessibility, 
flexibility, and annotation of globular domains. Using these descriptors and a
ridge regression model, DisCon predicts the content with low, 0.05, mean squared 
error and high, 0.68, Pearson correlation. This is a statistically significant
improvement over the content computed from outputs of ten modern disorder
predictors on a test dataset with proteins that share low sequence identity with 
the training sequences. The proposed predictive model is analyzed to discuss
factors related to the prediction of the disorder content.
CONCLUSIONS: DisCon is a high-quality alternative for high-throughput annotation 
of the disorder content. We also empirically demonstrate that the DisCon's
predictions can be used to improve binary annotations of the disordered residues 
from the real-value disorder propensities generated by current residue-level
disorder predictors. The web server that implements the DisCon is available at
http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/DisCon/.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-245 
PMCID: PMC3212983
PMID: 21682902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Mar 2;12:66. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-66.

Bioinformatics analysis of disordered proteins in prokaryotes.

Pavlović-Lažetić GM(1), Mitić NS, Kovačević JJ, Obradović Z, Malkov SN, Beljanski
MV.

BACKGROUND: A significant number of proteins have been shown to be intrinsically 
disordered, meaning that they lack a fixed 3 D structure or contain regions that 
do not posses a well defined 3 D structure. It has also been proven that a
protein's disorder content is related to its function. We have performed an
exhaustive analysis and comparison of the disorder content of proteins from
prokaryotic organisms (i.e., superkingdoms Archaea and Bacteria) with respect to 
functional categories they belong to, i.e., Clusters of Orthologous Groups of
proteins (COGs) and groups of COGs-Cellular processes (Cp), Information storage
and processing (Isp), Metabolism (Me) and Poorly characterized (Pc). We also
analyzed the disorder content of proteins with respect to various genomic,
metabolic and ecological characteristics of the organism they belong to. We used 
correlations and association rule mining in order to identify the most confident 
associations between specific modalities of the characteristics considered and
disorder content.
RESULTS: Bacteria are shown to have a somewhat higher level of protein disorder
than archaea, except for proteins in the Me functional group. It is demonstrated 
that the Isp and Cp functional groups in particular (L-repair function and N-cell
motility and secretion COGs of proteins in specific) possess the highest disorder
content, while Me proteins, in general, posses the lowest. Disorder fractions
have been confirmed to have the lowest level for the so-called order-promoting
amino acids and the highest level for the so-called disorder promoters. For each 
pair of organism characteristics, specific modalities are identified with the
maximum disorder proteins in the corresponding organisms, e.g., high genome
size-high GC content organisms, facultative anaerobic-low GC content organisms,
aerobic-high genome size organisms, etc. Maximum disorder in archaea is observed 
for high GC content-low genome size organisms, high GC content-facultative
anaerobic or aquatic or mesophilic organisms, etc. Maximum disorder in bacteria
is observed for high GC content-high genome size organisms, high genome
size-aerobic organisms, etc. Some of the most reliable association rules mined
establish relationships between high GC content and high protein disorder, medium
GC content and both medium and low protein disorder, anaerobic organisms and
medium protein disorder, Gammaproteobacteria and low protein disorder, etc. A web
site Prokaryote Disorder Database has been designed and implemented at the
address http://bioinfo.matf.bg.ac.rs/disorder, which contains complete results of
the analysis of protein disorder performed for 296 prokaryotic completely
sequenced genomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Exhaustive disorder analysis has been performed by functional
classes of proteins, for a larger dataset of prokaryotic organisms than
previously done. Results obtained are well correlated to those previously
published, with some extension in the range of disorder level and clear
distinction between functional classes of proteins. Wide correlation and
association analysis between protein disorder and genomic and ecological
characteristics has been performed for the first time. The results obtained give 
insight into multi-relationships among the characteristics and protein disorder. 
Such analysis provides for better understanding of the evolutionary process and
may be useful for taxon determination. The main drawback of the approach is the
fact that the disorder considered has been predicted and not experimentally
established.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-66 
PMCID: PMC3062596
PMID: 21366926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Int J Mol Sci. 2011;12(5):3205-19. doi: 10.3390/ijms12053205. Epub 2011 May 17.

Novel strategies for drug discovery based on Intrinsically Disordered Proteins
(IDPs).

Wang J(1), Cao Z, Zhao L, Li S.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are proteins that usually do not adopt
well-defined native structures when isolated in solution under physiological
conditions. Numerous IDPs have close relationships with human diseases such as
tumor, Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, diabetes, and so on. These
disease-associated IDPs commonly play principal roles in the disease-associated
protein-protein interaction networks. Most of them in the disease datasets have
more interactants and hence the size of the disease-associated IDPs interaction
network is simultaneously increased. For example, the tumor suppressor protein
p53 is an intrinsically disordered protein and also a hub protein in the p53
interaction network; α-synuclein, an intrinsically disordered protein involved in
Parkinson diseases, is also a hub of the protein network. The disease-associated 
IDPs may provide potential targets for drugs modulating protein-protein
interaction networks. Therefore, novel strategies for drug discovery based on
IDPs are in the ascendant. It is dependent on the features of IDPs to develop the
novel strategies. It is found out that IDPs have unique structural features such 
as high flexibility and random coil-like conformations which enable them to
participate in both the "one to many" and "many to one" interaction. Accordingly,
in order to promote novel strategies for drug discovery, it is essential that
more and more features of IDPs are revealed by experimental and computing
methods.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms12053205 
PMCID: PMC3116186
PMID: 21686180  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29207. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029207. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Disorder predictors also predict backbone dynamics for a family of disordered
proteins.

Daughdrill GW(1), Borcherds WM, Wu H.

Several algorithms have been developed that use amino acid sequences to predict
whether or not a protein or a region of a protein is disordered. These algorithms
make accurate predictions for disordered regions that are 30 amino acids or
longer, but it is unclear whether the predictions can be directly related to the 
backbone dynamics of individual amino acid residues. The nuclear Overhauser
effect between the amide nitrogen and hydrogen (NHNOE) provides an unambiguous
measure of backbone dynamics at single residue resolution and is an excellent
tool for characterizing the dynamic behavior of disordered proteins. In this
report, we show that the NHNOE values for several members of a family of
disordered proteins are highly correlated with the output from three popular
algorithms used to predict disordered regions from amino acid sequence. This is
the first test between an experimental measure of residue specific backbone
dynamics and disorder predictions. The results suggest that some disorder
predictors can accurately estimate the backbone dynamics of individual amino
acids in a long disordered region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029207 
PMCID: PMC3240651
PMID: 22195023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Proteins. 2011;79 Suppl 10:107-18. doi: 10.1002/prot.23161. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Evaluation of disorder predictions in CASP9.

Monastyrskyy B(1), Fidelis K, Moult J, Tramontano A, Kryshtafovych A.

Lack of stable three-dimensional structure, or intrinsic disorder, is a common
phenomenon in proteins. Naturally, unstructured regions are proven to be
essential for carrying function by many proteins, and therefore identification of
such regions is an important issue. CASP has been assessing the state of the art 
in predicting disorder regions from amino acid sequence since 2002. Here, we
present the results of the evaluation of the disorder predictions submitted to
CASP9. The assessment is based on the evaluation measures and procedures used in 
previous CASPs. The balanced accuracy and the Matthews correlation coefficient
were chosen as basic measures for evaluating the correctness of binary
classifications. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve was
the measure of choice for evaluating probability-based predictions of disorder.
The CASP9 methods are shown to perform slightly better than the CASP7 methods but
not better than the methods in CASP8. It was also shown that capability of most
CASP9 methods to predict disorder decreases with increasing minimum disorder
segment length.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.23161 
PMCID: PMC3212657
PMID: 21928402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 Oct 14;6(10):e1000958. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000958.

Library of disordered patterns in 3D protein structures.

Lobanov MY(1), Furletova EI, Bogatyreva NS, Roytberg MA, Galzitskaya OV.

Intrinsically disordered regions serve as molecular recognition elements, which
play an important role in the control of many cellular processes and signaling
pathways. It is useful to be able to predict positions of disordered regions in
protein chains. The statistical analysis of disordered residues was done
considering 34,464 unique protein chains taken from the PDB database. In this
database, 4.95% of residues are disordered (i.e. invisible in X-ray structures). 
The statistics were obtained separately for the N- and C-termini as well as for
the central part of the protein chain. It has been shown that frequencies of
occurrence of disordered residues of 20 types at the termini of protein chains
differ from the ones in the middle part of the protein chain. Our systematic
analysis of disordered regions in PDB revealed 109 disordered patterns of
different lengths. Each of them has disordered occurrences in at least five
protein chains with identity less than 20%. The vast majority of all occurrences 
of each disordered pattern are disordered. This allows one to use the library of 
disordered patterns for predicting the status of a residue of a given protein to 
be ordered or disordered. We analyzed the occurrence of the selected patterns in 
three eukaryotic and three bacterial proteomes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000958 
PMCID: PMC2954861
PMID: 20976197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Biosyst. 2010 Oct;6(10):1821-8. doi: 10.1039/c005144f. Epub 2010 Jun 11.

Intrinsic disorder and protein multibinding in domain, terminal, and linker
regions.

Fong JH(1), Panchenko AR.

Intrinsic disorder is believed to contribute to the ability of some proteins to
interact with multiple partners which is important for protein functional
promiscuity and regulation of the cross-talk between pathways. To better
understand the mechanisms of molecular recognition through disordered regions,
here, we systematically investigate the coupling between disorder and binding
within domain families in a structure interaction network and in terminal and
inter-domain linker regions. We showed that the canonical domain-domain
interaction model should take into account contributions of N- and C-termini and 
inter-domain linkers, which may form all or part of the binding interfaces. For
the majority of proteins, binding interfaces on domain and terminal regions were 
predicted to be less disordered than non-interface regions. Analysis of all
domain families revealed several exceptions, such as kinases, DNA/RNA binding
proteins, certain enzymes, and regulatory proteins, which are candidates for
disorder-to-order transitions that can occur upon binding. Domain interfaces that
bind single or multiple partners do not exhibit significant difference in
disorder content if normalized by the number of interactions. In general, protein
families with more diverse interactions exhibit less average disorder over all
members of the family. Our results shed light on recent controversies regarding
the relationship between disorder and binding of multiple partners at common
interfaces. In particular, they support the hypothesis that protein domains with 
many interacting partners should have a pleiotropic effect on functional pathways
and consequently might be more constrained in evolution.

DOI: 10.1039/c005144f 
PMCID: PMC2955455
PMID: 20544079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Int J Mol Sci. 2010 Sep 29;11(10):3725-47. doi: 10.3390/ijms11103725.

Retro-MoRFs: identifying protein binding sites by normal and reverse alignment
and intrinsic disorder prediction.

Xue B(1), Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

Many cell functions in all living organisms rely on protein-based molecular
recognition involving disorder-to-order transitions upon binding by molecular
recognition features (MoRFs). A well accepted computational tool for identifying 
likely protein-protein interactions is sequence alignment. In this paper, we
propose the combination of sequence alignment and disorder prediction as a tool
to improve the confidence of identifying MoRF-based protein-protein interactions.
The method of reverse sequence alignment is also rationalized here as a novel
approach for finding additional interaction regions, leading to the concept of a 
retro-MoRF, which has the reversed sequence of an identified MoRF. The set of
retro-MoRF binding partners likely overlap the partner-sets of the originally
identified MoRFs. The high abundance of MoRF-containing intrinsically disordered 
proteins in nature suggests the possibility that the number of retro-MoRFs could 
likewise be very high. This hypothesis provides new grounds for exploring the
mysteries of protein-protein interaction networks at the genome level.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms11103725 
PMCID: PMC2996789
PMID: 21152297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Expert Rev Proteomics. 2010 Aug;7(4):543-64. doi: 10.1586/epr.10.36.

Targeting intrinsically disordered proteins in neurodegenerative and protein
dysfunction diseases: another illustration of the D(2) concept.

Uversky VN(1).

Many biologically active proteins, which are usually called intrinsically
disordered or natively unfolded proteins, lack stable tertiary and/or secondary
structure under physiological conditions in vitro. Their functions complement the
functional repertoire of ordered proteins, with intrinsically disordered proteins
(IDPs) often being involved in regulation, signaling and control. Their amino
acid sequences and compositions are very different from those of ordered
proteins, making reliable identification of IDPs possible at the proteome level. 
IDPs are highly abundant in various human diseases, including neurodegeneration
and other protein dysfunction maladies and, therefore, represent attractive novel
drug targets. Some of the aspects of IDPs, as well as their roles in
neurodegeneration and protein dysfunction diseases, are discussed in this
article, together with the peculiarities of IDPs as potential drug targets.

DOI: 10.1586/epr.10.36 
PMCID: PMC3371274
PMID: 20653509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Protein Sci. 2010 Aug;19(8):1461-8. doi: 10.1002/pro.425.

Domain distribution and intrinsic disorder in hubs in the human protein-protein
interaction network.

Patil A(1), Kinoshita K, Nakamura H.

Intrinsic disorder and distributed surface charge have been previously identified
as some of the characteristics that differentiate hubs (proteins with a large
number of interactions) from non-hubs in protein-protein interaction networks. In
this study, we investigated the differences in the quantity, diversity, and
functional nature of Pfam domains, and their relationship with intrinsic
disorder, in hubs and non-hubs. We found that proteins with a more diverse domain
composition were over-represented in hubs when compared with non-hubs, with the
number of interactions in hubs increasing with domain diversity. Conversely, the 
fraction of intrinsic disorder in hubs decreased with increasing number of
ordered domains. The difference in the levels of disorder was more prominent in
hubs and non-hubs with fewer domains. Functional analysis showed that hubs were
enriched in kinase and adaptor domains acting primarily in signal transduction
and transcription regulation, whereas non-hubs had more DNA-binding domains and
were involved in catalytic activity. Consistent with the differences in the
functional nature of their domains, hubs with two or more domains were more
likely to connect distinct functional modules in the interaction network when
compared with single domain hubs. We conclude that the availability of greater
number and diversity of ordered domains, in addition to the tendency to have
promiscuous domains, differentiates hubs from non-hubs and provides an additional
means of achieving interaction promiscuity. Further, hubs with fewer domains use 
greater levels of intrinsic disorder to facilitate interaction promiscuity with
the prevalence of disorder decreasing with increasing number of ordered domains.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.425 
PMCID: PMC2923499
PMID: 20509167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2010 Jul;9(7):1383-99. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M900378-MCP200. Epub
2010 Feb 23.

Identification of quantitative trait loci underlying proteome variation in human 
lymphoblastoid cells.

Garge N(1), Pan H, Rowland MD, Cargile BJ, Zhang X, Cooley PC, Page GP, Bunger
MK.

Population-based variability in protein expression patterns, especially in
humans, is often observed but poorly understood. Moreover, very little is known
about how interindividual genetic variation contributes to protein expression
patterns. To begin to address this, we describe elements of technical and
biological variations contributing to expression of 544 proteins in a population 
of 24 individual human lymphoblastoid cell lines that have been extensively
genotyped as part of the International HapMap Project. We determined that
expression levels of 10% of the proteins were tightly correlated to cell doubling
rates. Using the publicly available genotypes for these lymphoblastoid cell
lines, we applied a genetic association approach to identify quantitative trait
loci associated with protein expression variation. Results identified 24 protein 
forms corresponding to 15 proteins for which genetic elements were responsible
for >50% of the expression variation. The genetic variation associated with
protein expression levels were located in cis with the gene coding for the
transcript of the protein for 19 of these protein forms. Four of the genetic
elements identified were coding non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms
that resulted in migration pattern changes in the two-dimensional gel. This is
the first description of large scale proteomics analysis demonstrating the direct
relationship between genome and proteome variations in human cells.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M900378-MCP200 
PMCID: PMC2938086
PMID: 20179311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Protein Sci. 2010 Jul;19(7):1376-85. doi: 10.1002/pro.418.

Functional dissection of an intrinsically disordered protein: understanding the
roles of different domains of Knr4 protein in protein-protein interactions.

Dagkessamanskaia A(1), Durand F, Uversky VN, Binda M, Lopez F, El Azzouzi K,
Francois JM, Martin-Yken H.

Knr4, recently characterized as an intrinsically disordered Saccharomyces
cerevisiae protein, participates in cell wall formation and cell cycle
regulation. It is constituted of a functional central globular core flanked by a 
poorly structured N-terminal and large natively unfolded C-terminal domains. Up
to now, about 30 different proteins have been reported to physically interact
with Knr4. Here, we used an in vivo two-hybrid system approach and an in vitro
surface plasmon resonance (BIAcore) technique to compare the interaction level of
different Knr4 deletion variants with given protein partners. We demonstrate the 
indispensability of the N-terminal domain of Knr4 for the interactions. On the
other hand, presence of the unstructured C-terminal domain has a negative effect 
on the interaction strength. In protein interactions networks, the most highly
connected proteins or "hubs" are significantly enriched in unstructured regions, 
and among them the transient hub proteins contain the largest and most highly
flexible regions. The results presented here of our analysis of Knr4 protein
suggest that these large disordered regions are not always involved in promoting 
the protein-protein interactions of hub proteins, but in some cases, might rather
inhibit them. We propose that this type of regions could prevent unspecific
protein interactions, or ensure the correct timing of occurrence of transient
interactions, which may be of crucial importance for different signaling and
regulation processes.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.418 
PMCID: PMC2974829
PMID: 20506404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2010 Jul;90(4):245-51. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2010.04.002.

Solution structure of Rv2377c-founding member of the MbtH-like protein family.

Buchko GW(1), Kim CY, Terwilliger TC, Myler PJ.

The Mycobacterium tuberculosis protein Rv2377c (71 residues, MW=8.4kDa) has been 
characterized using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and circular dichroism (CD) 
spectroscopy. Rv2377c was the first identified member of the MbtH-like family of 
proteins. MbtH-like proteins have been implicated in siderophore biosynthesis,
however, their precise biochemical function remain unknown. Size exclusion
chromatography and NMR spectroscopy show that Rv2377c is a monomer in solution.
Circular dichroism spectroscopy indicates that Rv2377c unfolds upon heating and
will reversibly fold into its native conformation upon cooling. Using NMR-based
methods the solution structure of Rv2377c was determined and some of the dynamic 
properties of the protein studied. The protein contains a three-strand,
anti-parallel beta-sheet (beta3:beta1:beta2) nestled against one C-terminal
alpha-helix (S44-N55). Weak or absent amide cross peaks in the (1)H-(15)N HSQC
spectrum for many of the beta1 and beta2 residues suggest intermediate motion on 
the ms to mus time scale at the beta1:beta2 interface. Amide cross peaks in the
(1)H-(15)N HSQC spectrum are absent for all but one residue at the C-terminus
(W56-D71), a region that includes a highly conserved sequence WXDXR, suggesting
this region is intrinsically disordered. The latter observation differs with the 
crystal structure of another MbtH-like protein, PA2412 from Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, where a second ordered alpha-helix was observed at the extreme
C-terminus.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2010.04.002 
PMCID: PMC2910232
PMID: 20434955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Jun;1804(6):1231-64. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.01.017. Epub 2010 Feb 1.

Understanding protein non-folding.

Uversky VN(1), Dunker AK.

This review describes the family of intrinsically disordered proteins, members of
which fail to form rigid 3-D structures under physiological conditions, either
along their entire lengths or only in localized regions. Instead, these
intriguing proteins/regions exist as dynamic ensembles within which atom
positions and backbone Ramachandran angles exhibit extreme temporal fluctuations 
without specific equilibrium values. Many of these intrinsically disordered
proteins are known to carry out important biological functions which, in fact,
depend on the absence of a specific 3-D structure. The existence of such proteins
does not fit the prevailing structure-function paradigm, which states that a
unique 3-D structure is a prerequisite to function. Thus, the protein
structure-function paradigm has to be expanded to include intrinsically
disordered proteins and alternative relationships among protein sequence,
structure, and function. This shift in the paradigm represents a major
breakthrough for biochemistry, biophysics and molecular biology, as it opens new 
levels of understanding with regard to the complex life of proteins. This review 
will try to answer the following questions: how were intrinsically disordered
proteins discovered? Why don't these proteins fold? What is so special about
intrinsic disorder? What are the functional advantages of disordered
proteins/regions? What is the functional repertoire of these proteins? What are
the relationships between intrinsically disordered proteins and human diseases?

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.01.017 
PMCID: PMC2882790
PMID: 20117254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2010 Jun-Jul;102(2-3):73-84. doi:
10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2010.01.003. Epub 2010 Jan 25.

The protein kingdom extended: ordered and intrinsically disordered proteins,
their folding, supramolecular complex formation, and aggregation.

Turoverov KK(1), Kuznetsova IM, Uversky VN.

The native state of a protein is usually associated with a compact globular
conformation possessing a rigid and highly ordered structure. At the turn of the 
last century certain studies arose which concluded that many proteins cannot, in 
principle, form a rigid globular structure in an aqueous environment, but they
are still able to fulfill their specific functions--i.e., they are native. The
existence of the disordered regions allows these proteins to interact with their 
numerous binding partners. Such interactions are often accompanied by the
formation of complexes that possess a more ordered structure than the original
components. The functional diversity of these proteins, combined with the
variability of signals related to the various intra- and intercellular processes 
handled by these proteins and their capability to produce multi-variant and
multi-directional responses allow them to form a unique regulatory net in a cell.
The abundance of disordered proteins inside the cell is precisely controlled at
the synthesis and clearance levels as well as via interaction with specific
binding partners and post-translational modifications. Another recently
recognized biologically active state of proteins is the functional amyloid. The
formation of such functional amyloids is tightly controlled and therefore differs
from the uncontrolled formation of pathogenic amyloids which are associated with 
the pathogenesis of several conformational diseases, the development of which is 
likely to be determined by the failures of the cellular regulatory systems rather
than by the formation of the proteinaceous deposits and/or by the protofibril
toxicity.

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2010.01.003 
PMCID: PMC2916636
PMID: 20097220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 May 28;4 Suppl 1:S1. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-S1-S1.

Archaic chaos: intrinsically disordered proteins in Archaea.

Xue B(1), Williams RW, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

BACKGROUND: Many proteins or their regions known as intrinsically disordered
proteins (IDPs) and intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) lack unique 3D
structure in their native states under physiological conditions yet fulfill key
biological functions. Earlier bioinformatics studies showed that IDPs and IDRs
are highly abundant in different proteomes and carry out mostly regulatory
functions related to molecular recognition and signal transduction. Archaea
belong to an intriguing domain of life whose members, being microbes, are
characterized by a unique mosaic-like combination of bacterial and eukaryotic
properties and include inhabitants of some of the most extreme environments on
the planet. With the expansion of the archaea genome data (more than fifty
archaea species from five different phyla are known now), and with recent
improvements in the accuracy of intrinsic disorder prediction, it is time to
re-examine the abundance of IDPs and IDRs in the archaea domain.
RESULTS: The abundance of IDPs and IDRs in 53 archaea species is analyzed. The
amino acid composition profiles of these species are generally quite different
from each other. The disordered content is highly species-dependent.
Thermoproteales proteomes have 14% of disordered residues, while in Halobacteria,
this value increases to 34%. In proteomes of these two phyla, proteins containing
long disordered regions account for 12% and 46%, whereas 4% and 26% their
proteins are wholly disordered. These three measures of disorder content are
linearly correlated with each other at the genome level. There is a weak
correlation between the environmental factors (such as salinity, pH and
temperature of the habitats) and the abundance of intrinsic disorder in Archaea, 
with various environmental factors possessing different disorder-promoting
strengths. Harsh environmental conditions, especially those combining several
hostile factors, clearly favor increased disorder content. Intrinsic disorder is 
highly abundant in functional Pfam domains of the archaea origin. The analysis
based on the disordered content and phylogenetic tree indicated diverse evolution
of intrinsic disorder among various classes and species of Archaea.
CONCLUSIONS: Archaea proteins are rich in intrinsic disorder. Some of these IDPs 
and IDRs likely evolve to help archaea to accommodate to their hostile habitats. 
Other archaean IDPs and IDRs possess crucial biological functions similar to
those of the bacterial and eukaryotic IDPs/IDRs.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-S1-S1 
PMCID: PMC2880407
PMID: 20522251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11557-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.027011. Epub 2010
Jan 26.

N-terminal domains of DELLA proteins are intrinsically unstructured in the
absence of interaction with GID1/gibberellic acid receptors.

Sun X(1), Jones WT, Harvey D, Edwards PJ, Pascal SM, Kirk C, Considine T, Sheerin
DJ, Rakonjac J, Oldfield CJ, Xue B, Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

The plant growth-repressing DELLA proteins (DELLAs) are known to represent a
convergence point in integration of multiple developmental and environmental
signals in planta, one of which is hormone gibberellic acid (GA). Binding of the 
liganded GA receptor (GID1/GA) to the N-terminal domain of DELLAs is required for
GA-induced degradation of DELLAs via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, thus
derepressing plant growth. However, the conformational changes of DELLAs upon
binding to GID1/GA, which are the key to understanding the precise mechanism of
GID1/GA-mediated degradation of DELLAs, remain unclear. Using biophysical,
biochemical, and bioinformatics approaches, we demonstrated for the first time
that the unbound N-terminal domains of DELLAs are intrinsically unstructured
proteins under physiological conditions. Within the intrinsically disordered
N-terminal domain of DELLAs, we have identified several molecular recognition
features, sequences known to undergo disorder-to-order transitions upon binding
to interacting proteins in intrinsically unstructured proteins. In accordance
with the molecular recognition feature analyses, we have observed the
binding-induced folding of N-terminal domains of DELLAs upon interaction with
AtGID1/GA. Our results also indicate that DELLA proteins can be divided into two 
subgroups in terms of their molecular compactness and their interactions with
monoclonal antibodies.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.027011 
PMCID: PMC2857034
PMID: 20103592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Self Nonself. 2010 Apr;1(2):89-102. Epub 2010 Feb 22.

The SCHOOL of nature: II. Protein order, disorder and oligomericity in
transmembrane signaling.

Sigalov AB(1).

Recent reports have revealed that many proteins that do not adopt globular
structures under native conditions, thus termed intrinsically disordered proteins
(IDPs), are involved in cell signaling. Intriguingly, physiologically relevant
oligomerization of IDPs has been recently observed and shown to exhibit unique
biophysical characteristics, including the lack of significant changes in
chemical shift and peak intensity upon binding. In this work, I summarize several
distinct features of protein disorder that are especially important as related to
receptor-mediated transmembrane signal transduction. I also hypothesize that
interactions of IDPs with their protein or lipid partners represent a general
biphasic process with the "no disorder-to-order" fast interaction which,
depending on the interacting partner, may or may not be accompanied by the slow
formation of a secondary structure. Further, I suggest signaling-related
functional connections between protein order, disorder, and oligomericity and
hypothesize that receptor oligomerization induced or tuned upon ligand binding
outside the cell is translated across the membrane into protein oligomerization
inside the cell, thus providing a general platform, the Signaling Chain
HOmoOLigomerization (SCHOOL) platform, for receptor-mediated signaling. This
structures our current multidisciplinary knowledge and views of the mechanisms
governing the coupling of recognition to signal transduction and cell response.
Importantly, this approach not only reveals previously unrecognized striking
similarities in the basic mechanistic principles of function of numerous
functionally diverse and unrelated surface membrane receptors, but also suggests 
the similarity between therapeutic targets, thus opening new horizons for both
fundamental and clinically relevant studies.

DOI: 10.4161/self.1.2.11590 
PMCID: PMC3065667
PMID: 21487511 


113. Mol Biol Evol. 2010 Mar;27(3):609-21. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msp277. Epub 2009 Nov
18.

Comparing models of evolution for ordered and disordered proteins.

Brown CJ(1), Johnson AK, Daughdrill GW.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2012 Jan;29(1):443.

Most models of protein evolution are based upon proteins that form relatively
rigid 3D structures. A significant fraction of proteins, the so-called disordered
proteins, do not form rigid 3D structures and sample a broad conformational
ensemble. Disordered proteins do not typically maintain long-range interactions, 
so the constraints on their evolution should be different than ordered proteins. 
To test this hypothesis, we developed and compared models of evolution for
disordered and ordered proteins. Substitution matrices were constructed using the
sequences of putative homologs for sets of experimentally characterized
disordered and ordered proteins. Separate matrices, at three levels of sequence
similarity (>85%, 85-60%, and 60-40%), were inferred for each type of protein
structure. The substitution matrices for disordered and ordered proteins differed
significantly at each level of sequence similarity. The disordered matrices
reflected a greater likelihood of evolutionary changes, relative to the ordered
matrices, and these changes involved nonconservative substitutions. Glutamic acid
and asparagine were interesting exceptions to this result. Important differences 
between the substitutions that are accepted in disordered proteins relative to
ordered proteins were also identified. In general, disordered proteins have fewer
evolutionary constraints than ordered proteins. However, some residues like
tryptophan and tyrosine are highly conserved in disordered proteins. This is due 
to their important role in forming protein-protein interfaces. Finally, the amino
acid frequencies for disordered proteins, computed during the development of the 
matrices, were compared with amino acid frequencies for different categories of
secondary structure in ordered proteins. The highest correlations were observed
between the amino acid frequencies in disordered proteins and the solvent-exposed
loops and turns of ordered proteins, supporting an emerging structural model for 
disordered proteins.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msp277 
PMCID: PMC2822292
PMID: 19923193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Proteins. 2010 Feb 15;78(3):714-22. doi: 10.1002/prot.22604.

Characterization of intrinsically disordered proteins with electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry: conformational heterogeneity of alpha-synuclein.

Frimpong AK(1), Abzalimov RR, Uversky VN, Kaltashov IA.

Conformational heterogeneity of alpha-synuclein was studied with electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry by analyzing protein ion charge state distributions,
where the extent of multiple charging reflects compactness of the protein
conformations in solution. Although alpha-synuclein lacks a single well-defined
structure under physiological conditions, it was found to sample four distinct
conformational states, ranging from a highly structured one to a random coil. The
compact highly structured state of alpha-synuclein is present across the entire
range of conditions tested (pH ranging from 2.5 to 10, alcohol content from 0% to
60%), but is particularly abundant in acidic solutions. The only other protein
state populated in acidic solutions is a partially folded intermediate state
lacking stable tertiary structure. Another, more compact intermediate state is
induced by significant amounts of ethanol used as a co-solvent and appears to
represent a partially folded conformation with high beta-sheet content. Protein
dimerization is observed throughout the entire range of conditions tested,
although only acidic solutions favor formation of highly structured dimers of
alpha-synuclein. These dimers are likely to present the earliest stages in
protein aggregation leading to globular oligomers and, subsequently,
protofibrils.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.22604 
PMCID: PMC5815318
PMID: 19847913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. BMC Genomics. 2010 Feb 10;11 Suppl 1:S15. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-S1-S15.

Parameterization of disorder predictors for large-scale applications requiring
high specificity by using an extended benchmark dataset.

Sirota FL(1), Ooi HS, Gattermayer T, Schneider G, Eisenhaber F, Maurer-Stroh S.

BACKGROUND: Algorithms designed to predict protein disorder play an important
role in structural and functional genomics, as disordered regions have been
reported to participate in important cellular processes. Consequently, several
methods with different underlying principles for disorder prediction have been
independently developed by various groups. For assessing their usability in
automated workflows, we are interested in identifying parameter settings and
threshold selections, under which the performance of these predictors becomes
directly comparable.
RESULTS: First, we derived a new benchmark set that accounts for different
flavours of disorder complemented with a similar amount of order annotation
derived for the same protein set. We show that, using the recommended default
parameters, the programs tested are producing a wide range of predictions at
different levels of specificity and sensitivity. We identify settings, in which
the different predictors have the same false positive rate. We assess conditions 
when sets of predictors can be run together to derive consensus or complementary 
predictions. This is useful in the framework of proteome-wide applications where 
high specificity is required such as in our in-house sequence analysis pipeline
and the ANNIE webserver.
CONCLUSIONS: This work identifies parameter settings and thresholds for a
selection of disorder predictors to produce comparable results at a desired level
of specificity over a newly derived benchmark dataset that accounts equally for
ordered and disordered regions of different lengths.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-S1-S15 
PMCID: PMC2822529
PMID: 20158872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. BMC Biochem. 2010 Jan 28;11:7. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-11-7.

NMR characterisation of the minimal interacting regions of centrosomal proteins
4.1R and NuMA1: effect of phosphorylation.

Treviño MA(1), Rodríguez-Rodríguez M, Correas I, Marcilla M, Albar JP, Rico M,
Jiménez MA, Bruix M.

BACKGROUND: Some functions of 4.1R in non-erythroid cells are directly related
with its distinct sub-cellular localisation during cell cycle phases. During
mitosis, 4.1R is implicated in cell cycle progression and spindle pole formation,
and co-localizes with NuMA1. However, during interphase 4.1R is located in the
nucleus and only partially co-localizes with NuMA1.
RESULTS: We have characterized by NMR the structural features of the C-terminal
domain of 4.1R and those of the minimal region (the last 64 residues) involved in
the interaction with NuMA1. This subdomain behaves as an intrinsically unfolded
protein containing a central region with helical tendency. The specific residues 
implicated in the interaction with NuMA1 have been mapped by NMR titrations and
involve the N-terminal and central helical regions. The segment of NuMA1 that
interacts with 4.1R is phosphorylated during mitosis. Interestingly, NMR data
indicates that the phosphorylation of NuMA1 interacting peptide provokes a change
in the interaction mechanism. In this case, the recognition occurs through the
central helical region as well as through the C-terminal region of the subdomain 
meanwhile the N-terminal region do not interact.
CONCLUSIONS: These changes in the interaction derived from the phosphorylation
state of NuMA1 suggest that phosphorylation can act as subtle mechanism of
temporal and spatial regulation of the complex 4.1R-NuMA1 and therefore of the
processes where both proteins play a role.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2091-11-7 
PMCID: PMC2834593
PMID: 20109190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010 Jan 25;11:46. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-46.

Bayesian statistical modelling of human protein interaction network incorporating
protein disorder information.

Bulashevska S(1), Bulashevska A, Eils R.

BACKGROUND: We present a statistical method of analysis of biological networks
based on the exponential random graph model, namely p2-model, as opposed to
previous descriptive approaches. The model is capable to capture generic and
structural properties of a network as emergent from local interdependencies and
uses a limited number of parameters. Here, we consider one global parameter
capturing the density of edges in the network, and local parameters representing 
each node's contribution to the formation of edges in the network. The modelling 
suggests a novel definition of important nodes in the network, namely social, as 
revealed based on the local sociality parameters of the model. Moreover, the
sociality parameters help to reveal organizational principles of the network. An 
inherent advantage of our approach is the possibility of hypotheses testing: a
priori knowledge about biological properties of the nodes can be incorporated
into the statistical model to investigate its influence on the structure of the
network.
RESULTS: We applied the statistical modelling to the human protein interaction
network obtained with Y2H experiments. Bayesian approach for the estimation of
the parameters was employed. We deduced social proteins, essential for the
formation of the network, while incorporating into the model information on
protein disorder. Intrinsically disordered are proteins which lack a well-defined
three-dimensional structure under physiological conditions. We predicted the fold
group (ordered or disordered) of proteins in the network from their primary
sequences. The network analysis indicated that protein disorder has a positive
effect on the connectivity of proteins in the network, but do not fully explains 
the interactivity.
CONCLUSIONS: The approach opens a perspective to study effects of biological
properties of individual entities on the structure of biological networks.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-46 
PMCID: PMC2831004
PMID: 20100321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2010;2010:568068. doi: 10.1155/2010/568068.

The mysterious unfoldome: structureless, underappreciated, yet vital part of any 
given proteome.

Uversky VN(1).

Contrarily to the general believe, many biologically active proteins lack stable 
tertiary and/or secondary structure under physiological conditions in vitro.
These intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are highly abundant in nature and 
many of them are associated with various human diseases. The functional
repertoire of IDPs complements the functions of ordered proteins. Since IDPs
constitute a significant portion of any given proteome, they can be combined in
an unfoldome; which is a portion of the proteome including all IDPs (also known
as natively unfolded proteins, therefore, unfoldome), and describing their
functions, structures, interactions, evolution, and so forth. Amino acid sequence
and compositions of IDPs are very different from those of ordered proteins,
making possible reliable identification of IDPs at the proteome level by various 
computational means. Furthermore, IDPs possess a number of unique structural
properties and are characterized by a peculiar conformational behavior, including
their high stability against low pH and high temperature and their structural
indifference toward the unfolding by strong denaturants. These peculiarities were
shown to be useful for elaboration of the experimental techniques for the
large-scale identification of IDPs in various organisms. Some of the
computational and experimental tools for the unfoldome discovery are discussed in
this review.

DOI: 10.1155/2010/568068 
PMCID: PMC2789583
PMID: 20011072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jan;38(Database issue):D283-7. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp963.
Epub 2009 Nov 11.

ComSin: database of protein structures in bound (complex) and unbound (single)
states in relation to their intrinsic disorder.

Lobanov MY(1), Shoemaker BA, Garbuzynskiy SO, Fong JH, Panchenko AR, Galzitskaya 
OV.

Most of the proteins in a cell assemble into complexes to carry out their
function. In this work, we have created a new database (named ComSin) of protein 
structures in bound (complex) and unbound (single) states to provide a researcher
with exhaustive information on structures of the same or homologous proteins in
bound and unbound states. From the complete Protein Data Bank (PDB), we selected 
24 910 pairs of protein structures in bound and unbound states, and identified
regions of intrinsic disorder. For 2448 pairs, the proteins in bound and unbound 
states are identical, while 7129 pairs have sequence identity 90% or larger. The 
developed server enables one to search for proteins in bound and unbound states
with several options including sequence similarity between the corresponding
proteins in bound and unbound states, and validation of interaction interfaces of
protein complexes. Besides that, through our web server, one can obtain necessary
information for studying disorder-to-order and order-to-disorder transitions upon
complex formation, and analyze structural differences between proteins in bound
and unbound states. The database is available at
http://antares.protres.ru/comsin/.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkp963 
PMCID: PMC2808974
PMID: 19906708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Biosyst. 2009 Dec;5(12):1688-1702. doi: 10.1039/B905913J.

Analysis of structured and intrinsically disordered regions of transmembrane
proteins.

Xue B(1), Li L, Meroueh SO, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Integral membrane proteins display two major types of transmembrane structure,
helical bundles and beta barrels. The main functional roles of transmembrane
proteins are the transport of small molecules and cell signaling, and sometimes
these two roles are coupled. For cytosolic, water-soluble proteins, signaling and
regulatory functions are often carried out by intrinsically disordered regions.
Our long range goal is to determine whether integral membrane proteins likewise
use disordered regions for signaling and regulation. Here we carried out a
systematic bioinformatics investigation of intrinsically disordered regions
obtained from integral membrane proteins for which crystal structures have been
determined, and for which the intrinsic disorder was identified as missing
electron density. We found 120 disorder-containing integral membrane proteins
having a total of 33675 residues, with 3209 of the residues distributed among 240
different disordered regions. These disordered regions were compared with those
obtained from water-soluble proteins with regards to their amino acid
compositional biases, and to the accuracies of various disorder predictors. The
results of these analyses show that the disordered regions from helical bundle
integral membrane proteins, those from beta barrel integral membrane proteins,
and those from water soluble proteins all exhibit statistically distinct amino
acid compositional biases. Despite these differences in composition, current
algorithms make reasonably accurate predictions of disorder for these membrane
proteins. Although the small size of the current data sets are limiting, these
results suggest that developing new predictors that make use of data from
disordered regions in helical bundles and beta barrels, especially as these
datasets increase in size, will likely lead to significantly more accurate
disorder predictions for these two classes of integral membrane proteins.

DOI: 10.1039/B905913J 
PMCID: PMC2887740
PMID: 19585006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 24;106(47):19819-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0907710106. Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Toward a quantitative theory of intrinsically disordered proteins and their
function.

Liu J(1), Faeder JR, Camacho CJ.

A large number of proteins are sufficiently unstable that their full 3D structure
cannot be resolved. The origins of this intrinsic disorder are not well
understood, but its ubiquitous presence undercuts the principle that a protein's 
structure determines its function. Here we present a quantitative theory that
makes predictions regarding the role of intrinsic disorder in protein structure
and function. In particular, we discuss the implications of analytical solutions 
of a series of fundamental thermodynamic models of protein interactions in which 
disordered proteins are characterized by positive folding free energies. We
validate our predictions by assigning protein function by using the gene ontology
classification--in which "protein binding", "catalytic activity", and
"transcription regulator activity" are the three largest functional
categories--and by performing genome-wide surveys of both the amount of disorder 
in these functional classes and binding affinities for both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic genomes. Specifically, without assuming any a priori
structure-function relationship, the theory predicts that both catalytic and
low-affinity binding (K(d) greater, >or= 0(-7) M) proteins prefer ordered
structures, whereas only high-affinity binding proteins (found mostly in
eukaryotes) can tolerate disorder. Relevant to both transcription and signal
transduction, the theory also explains how increasing disorder can tune the
binding affinity to maximize the specificity of promiscuous interactions.
Collectively, these studies provide insight into how natural selection acts on
folding stability to optimize protein function.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907710106 
PMCID: PMC2775701
PMID: 19903882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Genetics. 2009 Oct;183(2):639-50. doi: 10.1534/genetics.109.106492. Epub 2009 Jul
20.

Lethal mutagenesis in viruses and bacteria.

Chen P(1), Shakhnovich EI.

In this work we study how mutations that change physical properties of cell
proteins (stability) affect population survival and growth. We present a model in
which the genotype is presented as a set folding free energies of cell proteins. 
Mutations occur upon replication, so stabilities of some proteins in daughter
cells differ from those in the parent cell by amounts deduced from the
distribution of mutational effects on protein stability. The genotype-phenotype
relationship posits that the cell's fitness (replication rate) is proportional to
the concentration of its folded proteins and that unstable essential proteins
result in lethality. Simulations reveal that lethal mutagenesis occurs at a
mutation rate close to seven mutations in each replication of the genome for RNA 
viruses and at about half that rate for DNA-based organisms, in accord with
earlier predictions from analytical theory and experimental results. This number 
appears somewhat dependent on the number of genes in the organisms and the
organism's natural death rate. Further, our model reproduces the distribution of 
stabilities of natural proteins, in excellent agreement with experiments. We find
that species with high mutation rates tend to have less stable proteins compared 
to species with low mutation rates.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.109.106492 
PMCID: PMC2766323
PMID: 19620390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Virol. 2009 Oct;83(20):10719-36. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00595-09. Epub 2009 Jul 29.

Overlapping genes produce proteins with unusual sequence properties and offer
insight into de novo protein creation.

Rancurel C(1), Khosravi M, Dunker AK, Romero PR, Karlin D.

It is widely assumed that new proteins are created by duplication, fusion, or
fission of existing coding sequences. Another mechanism of protein birth is
provided by overlapping genes. They are created de novo by mutations within a
coding sequence that lead to the expression of a novel protein in another reading
frame, a process called "overprinting." To investigate this mechanism, we have
analyzed the sequences of the protein products of manually curated overlapping
genes from 43 genera of unspliced RNA viruses infecting eukaryotes. Overlapping
proteins have a sequence composition globally biased toward disorder-promoting
amino acids and are predicted to contain significantly more structural disorder
than nonoverlapping proteins. By analyzing the phylogenetic distribution of
overlapping proteins, we were able to confirm that 17 of these had been created
de novo and to study them individually. Most proteins created de novo are orphans
(i.e., restricted to one species or genus). Almost all are accessory proteins
that play a role in viral pathogenicity or spread, rather than proteins central
to viral replication or structure. Most proteins created de novo are predicted to
be fully disordered and have a highly unusual sequence composition. This suggests
that some viral overlapping reading frames encoding hypothetical proteins with
highly biased composition, often discarded as noncoding, might in fact encode
proteins. Some proteins created de novo are predicted to be ordered, however, and
whenever a three-dimensional structure of such a protein has been solved, it
corresponds to a fold previously unobserved, suggesting that the study of these
proteins could enhance our knowledge of protein space.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00595-09 
PMCID: PMC2753099
PMID: 19640978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. BMC Genomics. 2009 Jul 7;10 Suppl 1:S7. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-S1-S7.

Unfoldomics of human diseases: linking protein intrinsic disorder with diseases.

Uversky VN(1), Oldfield CJ, Midic U, Xie H, Xue B, Vucetic S, Iakoucheva LM,
Obradovic Z, Dunker AK.

BACKGROUND: Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and intrinsically disordered
regions (IDRs) lack stable tertiary and/or secondary structure yet fulfills key
biological functions. The recent recognition of IDPs and IDRs is leading to an
entire field aimed at their systematic structural characterization and at
determination of their mechanisms of action. Bioinformatics studies showed that
IDPs and IDRs are highly abundant in different proteomes and carry out mostly
regulatory functions related to molecular recognition and signal transduction.
These activities complement the functions of structured proteins. IDPs and IDRs
were shown to participate in both one-to-many and many-to-one signaling.
Alternative splicing and posttranslational modifications are frequently used to
tune the IDP functionality. Several individual IDPs were shown to be associated
with human diseases, such as cancer, cardiovascular disease, amyloidoses,
diabetes, neurodegenerative diseases, and others. This raises questions regarding
the involvement of IDPs and IDRs in various diseases.
RESULTS: IDPs and IDRs were shown to be highly abundant in proteins associated
with various human maladies. As the number of IDPs related to various diseases
was found to be very large, the concepts of the disease-related unfoldome and
unfoldomics were introduced. Novel bioinformatics tools were proposed to populate
and characterize the disease-associated unfoldome. Structural characterization of
the members of the disease-related unfoldome requires specialized experimental
approaches. IDPs possess a number of unique structural and functional features
that determine their broad involvement into the pathogenesis of various diseases.
CONCLUSION: Proteins associated with various human diseases are enriched in
intrinsic disorder. These disease-associated IDPs and IDRs are real, abundant,
diversified, vital, and dynamic. These proteins and regions comprise the
disease-related unfoldome, which covers a significant part of the human proteome.
Profound association between intrinsic disorder and various human diseases is
determined by a set of unique structural and functional characteristics of IDPs
and IDRs. Unfoldomics of human diseases utilizes unrivaled bioinformatics and
experimental techniques, paves the road for better understanding of human
diseases, their pathogenesis and molecular mechanisms, and helps develop new
strategies for the analysis of disease-related proteins.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-S1-S7 
PMCID: PMC2709268
PMID: 19594884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. BMC Genomics. 2009 Jul 7;10 Suppl 1:S12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-S1-S12.

Protein disorder in the human diseasome: unfoldomics of human genetic diseases.

Midic U(1), Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Uversky VN.

BACKGROUND: Intrinsically disordered proteins lack stable structure under
physiological conditions, yet carry out many crucial biological functions,
especially functions associated with regulation, recognition, signaling and
control. Recently, human genetic diseases and related genes were organized into a
bipartite graph (Goh KI, Cusick ME, Valle D, Childs B, Vidal M, et al. (2007) The
human disease network. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104: 8685-8690). This diseasome
network revealed several significant features such as the common genetic origin
of many diseases.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We analyzed the abundance of intrinsic disorder in these
diseasome network proteins by means of several prediction algorithms, and we
analyzed the functional repertoires of these proteins based on prior studies
relating disorder to function. Our analyses revealed that (i) Intrinsic disorder 
is common in proteins associated with many human genetic diseases; (ii) Different
disease classes vary in the IDP contents of their associated proteins; (iii)
Molecular recognition features, which are relatively short loosely structured
protein regions within mostly disordered sequences and which gain structure upon 
binding to partners, are common in the diseasome, and their abundance correlates 
with the intrinsic disorder level; (iv) Some disease classes have a significant
fraction of genes affected by alternative splicing, and the alternatively spliced
regions in the corresponding proteins are predicted to be highly disordered; and 
(v) Correlations were found among the various diseasome graph-related properties 
and intrinsic disorder.
CONCLUSION: These observations provide the basis for the construction of the
human-genetic-disease-associated unfoldome.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-S1-S12 
PMCID: PMC2709255
PMID: 19594871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nat Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):750-6. doi: 10.1038/nm.1983. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

A small molecule blocking oncogenic protein EWS-FLI1 interaction with RNA
helicase A inhibits growth of Ewing's sarcoma.

Erkizan HV(1), Kong Y, Merchant M, Schlottmann S, Barber-Rotenberg JS, Yuan L,
Abaan OD, Chou TH, Dakshanamurthy S, Brown ML, Uren A, Toretsky JA.

Many sarcomas and leukemias carry nonrandom chromosomal translocations encoding
tumor-specific mutant fusion transcription factors that are essential to their
molecular pathogenesis. Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs) contain a
characteristic t(11;22) translocation leading to expression of the oncogenic
fusion protein EWS-FLI1. EWS-FLI1 is a disordered protein that precludes standard
structure-based small-molecule inhibitor design. EWS-FLI1 binding to RNA helicase
A (RHA) is important for its oncogenic function. We therefore used surface
plasmon resonance screening to identify compounds that bind EWS-FLI1 and might
block its interaction with RHA. YK-4-279, a derivative of the lead compound from 
the screen, blocks RHA binding to EWS-FLI1, induces apoptosis in ESFT cells and
reduces the growth of ESFT orthotopic xenografts. These findings provide proof of
principle that inhibiting the interaction of mutant cancer-specific transcription
factors with the normal cellular binding partners required for their oncogenic
activity provides a promising strategy for the development of uniquely effective,
tumor-specific anticancer agents.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.1983 
PMCID: PMC2777681
PMID: 19584866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Virol J. 2009 Jun 3;6:69. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-69.

Protein intrinsic disorder and influenza virulence: the 1918 H1N1 and H5N1
viruses.

Goh GK(1), Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

BACKGROUND: The 1918 H1N1 virus was a highly virulent strain that killed 20-50
million people. The cause of its virulence remains poorly understood.
METHODS: Intrinsic disorder predictor PONDR VLXT was used to compare various
influenza subtypes and strains. Three-dimensional models using data from X-ray
crystallographic studies annotated with disorder prediction were used to
characterize the proteins.
RESULTS: The protein of interest is hemagglutin (HA), which is a surface
glycoprotein that plays a vital role in viral entry. Distinct differences between
HA proteins of the virulent and non-virulent strains are seen, especially in the 
region near residues 68-79 of the HA2. This region represents the tip of the
stalk that is in contact with the receptor chain, HA1, and therefore likely to
provide the greatest effect on the motions of the exposed portion of HA.
Comparison of this region between virulent strains (1918 H1N1 and H5N1) and less 
virulent ones (H3N2 and 1930 H1N1) reveals that predicted disorder can be seen at
this region among the more virulent strains and subtypes but is remarkably absent
among the distinctly less virulent ones.
CONCLUSION: The motions created by disorder at crucial regions are likely to
impair recognition by immunological molecules and increase the virulence of both 
the H5N1 and the 1918 H1N1 viruses. The results help explain many puzzling
features of the H5N1 and the 1918 H1N1 viruses. Summarizing, HA (and especially
its intrinsically disordered regions) can serve as a predictor of the influenza A
virulence, even though there may be other proteins that contribute to or
exacerbate the virulence.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-69 
PMCID: PMC2701943
PMID: 19493338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Mol Biol. 2009 May 22;388(5):954-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.03.044. Epub 2009 
Mar 24.

Existence of a noncanonical state of iron-bound transferrin at endosomal pH
revealed by hydrogen exchange and mass spectrometry.

Bobst CE(1), Zhang M, Kaltashov IA.

Transferrin (Tf) is an enigmatic metalloprotein that exhibits a profound
conformational change upon binding of ferric ion and a synergistic anion (oxalate
or carbonate). While the apo and holo forms of the protein have well-defined and 
stable conformations termed "open" and "closed," certain aspects of Tf behavior
imply the existence of alternative protein states. In this work,
hydrogen/deuterium exchange was used in combination with mass spectrometry to map
solvent-accessible surfaces of the iron-bound and iron-free forms of the
N-terminal lobe of human serum Tf at both neutral and endosomal pH levels. While 
the deuterium uptake is significantly decelerated in the iron-bound state of the 
protein (compared with the apo form) at neutral pH, the changes are distributed
very unevenly across the protein sequence. Protein segments exhibiting most
noticeable gain in protection map onto the interdomain cleft region housing the
iron-binding site. At the same time, protection levels of segments located in the
bulk of the protein are largely unaffected by the presence of the metal. These
observations are fully consistent with the notion of a metal-induced switch from 
the open to the closed conformation with solvent-inaccessible interdomain cleft. 
However, differences in the exchange behavior between the apo and holo forms of
Tf become much less noticeable at endosomal pH, including the segments located in
the interdomain cleft region. Intriguingly, a significant patch in the cleft
region becomes slightly less protected in the presence of the metal, suggesting
that the holoprotein exists in the open conformation under these slightly acidic 
conditions. The existence of a noncanonical state of holoTf was postulated
several years ago; however, this work provides, for the first time, conclusive
evidence that such alternative states are indeed populated in solution.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.03.044 
PMCID: PMC2933096
PMID: 19324057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Mol Biol. 2009 May 8;388(3):597-610. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.03.053. Epub 2009 
Mar 25.

At low concentrations, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) binds
non-covalently to alpha-synuclein and prevents its fibrillation.

Zhou W(1), Gallagher A, Hong DP, Long C, Fink AL, Uversky VN.

Several studies have shown that catecholamines can inhibit the fibrillation of
alpha-synuclein (alpha-Syn), a small presynaptic protein whose aggregation is
believed to be a critical step in the etiology of Parkinson's disease and several
other neurodegenerative disorders. However, the mechanism of this inhibition is
uncertain. We show here that substoichiometric concentrations of
3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC), a normal product of the metabolism of
dopamine, can inhibit the fibrillation of alpha-Syn, due to non-covalent binding 
of DOPAC to alpha-Syn monomer. Intriguingly, the presence of alpha-Syn
accelerates the spontaneous oxidation of DOPAC, and the oxidized form of DOPAC
(the quinone) is responsible for the fibrillation inhibition. In addition, the
presence of DOPAC leads to the oxidation of the methionine residues of alpha-Syn,
probably due to the H(2)O(2) production as a by-product of DOPAC oxidation. The
lack of fibrillation results from the formation of stable oligomers, which are
very similar to those observed transiently at early stages of the alpha-Syn
fibrillation. A possible explanation for this phenomenon is that DOPAC stabilizes
the normally transient oligomers and prevents them from subsequent fibril
formation. The analysis of the alpha-Syn Y39W variant suggests that DOPAC binds
non-covalently to the same N-terminal region of alpha-Syn as lipid vesicles,
probably in the vicinity of residue 39. In contrast to the compounds with
1,2-dihydroxyphenyl groups (DOPAC and catechol), their 1,4-dihydroxyphenyl
isomers (hydroquinone and homogentisic acid) are able to modify alpha-Syn
covalently, probably due to the less steric hindrance in the Michael addition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.03.053 
PMCID: PMC2719782
PMID: 19328209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009 May;5(5):e1000376. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000376. Epub
2009 May 1.

Prediction of protein binding regions in disordered proteins.

Mészáros B(1), Simon I, Dosztányi Z.

Many disordered proteins function via binding to a structured partner and undergo
a disorder-to-order transition. The coupled folding and binding can confer
several functional advantages such as the precise control of binding specificity 
without increased affinity. Additionally, the inherent flexibility allows the
binding site to adopt various conformations and to bind to multiple partners.
These features explain the prevalence of such binding elements in signaling and
regulatory processes. In this work, we report ANCHOR, a method for the prediction
of disordered binding regions. ANCHOR relies on the pairwise energy estimation
approach that is the basis of IUPred, a previous general disorder prediction
method. In order to predict disordered binding regions, we seek to identify
segments that are in disordered regions, cannot form enough favorable intrachain 
interactions to fold on their own, and are likely to gain stabilizing energy by
interacting with a globular protein partner. The performance of ANCHOR was found 
to be largely independent from the amino acid composition and adopted secondary
structure. Longer binding sites generally were predicted to be segmented, in
agreement with available experimentally characterized examples. Scanning several 
hundred proteomes showed that the occurrence of disordered binding sites
increased with the complexity of the organisms even compared to disordered
regions in general. Furthermore, the length distribution of binding sites was
different from disordered protein regions in general and was dominated by shorter
segments. These results underline the importance of disordered proteins and
protein segments in establishing new binding regions. Due to their specific
biophysical properties, disordered binding sites generally carry a robust
sequence signal, and this signal is efficiently captured by our method. Through
its generality, ANCHOR opens new ways to study the essential functional sites of 
disordered proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000376 
PMCID: PMC2671142
PMID: 19412530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Protein Sci. 2009 May;18(5):980-93. doi: 10.1002/pro.108.

Trichloroacetic acid-induced protein precipitation involves the reversible
association of a stable partially structured intermediate.

Rajalingam D(1), Loftis C, Xu JJ, Kumar TK.

Sample preparation for proteomic analysis involves precipitation of protein using
2,2,2-trichloroacetic acid (TCA). In this study, we examine the mechanism of the 
TCA-induced protein precipitation reaction. TCA-induced protein precipitation
curves are U-shaped and the shape of the curve is observed to be independent of
the physicochemical properties of proteins. TCA is significantly less effective
in precipitating unfolded states of proteins. Results of the
1-anilino-8-napthalene sulfonate (ANS) and size-exclusion chromatography,
obtained using acidic fibroblast growth factor (aFGF), show that a stable "molten
globule-like" partially structured intermediate accumulates maximally in 5% (w/v)
of trichloroacetate. Urea-induced unfolding and limited proteolytic digestion
data reveal that the partially structured intermediate is significantly less
stable than the native conformation. (1)H-(15)N chemical shift perturbation data 
obtained using NMR spectroscopy indicate that interactions stabilizing the
beta-strands at the N- and C- terminal ends (of aFGF) are disrupted in the
trichloroacetate-induced "MG-like" state. The results of the study clearly
demonstrate that TCA-induced protein precipitation occurs due to the reversible
association of the "MG-like" partially structured intermediate state(s). In our
opinion, the findings of this study provide useful clues toward development of
efficient protocols for the isolation and analysis of the entire proteome.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.108 
PMCID: PMC2771300
PMID: 19388015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009 Mar;5(3):e1000316. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000316. Epub
2009 Mar 13.

Intrinsic disorder in protein interactions: insights from a comprehensive
structural analysis.

Fong JH(1), Shoemaker BA, Garbuzynskiy SO, Lobanov MY, Galzitskaya OV, Panchenko 
AR.

We perform a large-scale study of intrinsically disordered regions in proteins
and protein complexes using a non-redundant set of hundreds of different protein 
complexes. In accordance with the conventional view that folding and binding are 
coupled, in many of our cases the disorder-to-order transition occurs upon
complex formation and can be localized to binding interfaces. Moreover, analysis 
of disorder in protein complexes depicts a significant fraction of intrinsically 
disordered regions, with up to one third of all residues being disordered. We
find that the disorder in homodimers, especially in symmetrical homodimers, is
significantly higher than in heterodimers and offer an explanation for this
interesting phenomenon. We argue that the mechanisms of regulation of binding
specificity through disordered regions in complexes can be as common as for
unbound monomeric proteins. The fascinating diversity of roles of disordered
regions in various biological processes and protein oligomeric forms shown in our
study may be a subject of future endeavors in this area.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000316 
PMCID: PMC2646137
PMID: 19282967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Virol J. 2009 Feb 16;6:23. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-23.

Intrinsic disorder in Viral Proteins Genome-Linked: experimental and predictive
analyses.

Hébrard E(1), Bessin Y, Michon T, Longhi S, Uversky VN, Delalande F, Van
Dorsselaer A, Romero P, Walter J, Declerck N, Fargette D.

BACKGROUND: VPgs are viral proteins linked to the 5' end of some viral genomes.
Interactions between several VPgs and eukaryotic translation initiation factors
eIF4Es are critical for plant infection. However, VPgs are not restricted to
phytoviruses, being also involved in genome replication and protein translation
of several animal viruses. To date, structural data are still limited to small
picornaviral VPgs. Recently three phytoviral VPgs were shown to be natively
unfolded proteins.
RESULTS: In this paper, we report the bacterial expression, purification and
biochemical characterization of two phytoviral VPgs, namely the VPgs of Rice
yellow mottle virus (RYMV, genus Sobemovirus) and Lettuce mosaic virus (LMV,
genus Potyvirus). Using far-UV circular dichroism and size exclusion
chromatography, we show that RYMV and LMV VPgs are predominantly or partly
unstructured in solution, respectively. Using several disorder predictors, we
show that both proteins are predicted to possess disordered regions. We next
extend theses results to 14 VPgs representative of the viral diversity.
Disordered regions were predicted in all VPg sequences whatever the genus and the
family.
CONCLUSION: Based on these results, we propose that intrinsic disorder is a
common feature of VPgs. The functional role of intrinsic disorder is discussed in
light of the biological roles of VPgs.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-23 
PMCID: PMC2649914
PMID: 19220875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2009 Feb;19(1):31-8. doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2008.12.003. Epub 
2009 Jan 20.

Linking folding and binding.

Wright PE(1), Dyson HJ.

Many cellular proteins are intrinsically disordered and undergo folding, in whole
or in part, upon binding to their physiological targets. The past few years have 
seen an exponential increase in papers describing characterization of
intrinsically disordered proteins, both free and bound to targets. Although NMR
spectroscopy remains the favored tool, a number of new biophysical techniques are
proving exceptionally useful in defining the limits of the conformational
ensembles. Advances have been made in prediction of the recognition elements in
disordered proteins, in elucidating the kinetics and mechanism of the coupled
folding and binding process, and in understanding the role of post-translational 
modifications in tuning the biological response. Here we review these and other
recent advances that are providing new insights into the conformational
propensities and interactions of intrinsically disordered proteins and are
beginning to reveal general principles underlying their biological functions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.2008.12.003 
PMCID: PMC2675572
PMID: 19157855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Genome Biol. 2009;10(5):R50. doi: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-5-r50. Epub 2009 May 11.

Insights into the regulation of intrinsically disordered proteins in the human
proteome by analyzing sequence and gene expression data.

Edwards YJ(1), Lobley AE, Pentony MM, Jones DT.

BACKGROUND: Disordered proteins need to be expressed to carry out specified
functions; however, their accumulation in the cell can potentially cause major
problems through protein misfolding and aggregation. Gene expression levels, mRNA
decay rates, microRNA (miRNA) targeting and ubiquitination have critical roles in
the degradation and disposal of human proteins and transcripts. Here, we describe
a study examining these features to gain insights into the regulation of
disordered proteins.
RESULTS: In comparison with ordered proteins, disordered proteins have a greater 
proportion of predicted ubiquitination sites. The transcripts encoding disordered
proteins also have higher proportions of predicted miRNA target sites and higher 
mRNA decay rates, both of which are indicative of the observed lower gene
expression levels. The results suggest that the disordered proteins and their
transcripts are present in the cell at low levels and/or for a short time before 
being targeted for disposal. Surprisingly, we find that for a significant
proportion of highly disordered proteins, all four of these trends are reversed. 
Predicted estimates for miRNA targets, ubiquitination and mRNA decay rate are low
in the highly disordered proteins that are constitutively and/or highly
expressed.
CONCLUSIONS: Mechanisms are in place to protect the cell from these potentially
dangerous proteins. The evidence suggests that the enrichment of signals for
miRNA targeting and ubiquitination may help prevent the accumulation of
disordered proteins in the cell. Our data also provide evidence for a mechanism
by which a significant proportion of highly disordered proteins (with high
expression levels) can escape rapid degradation to allow them to successfully
carry out their function.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-5-r50 
PMCID: PMC2718516
PMID: 19432952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Proteome Res. 2009 Jan;8(1):211-26. doi: 10.1021/pr800308v.

Large-scale analysis of thermostable, mammalian proteins provides insights into
the intrinsically disordered proteome.

Galea CA(1), High AA, Obenauer JC, Mishra A, Park CG, Punta M, Schlessinger A, Ma
J, Rost B, Slaughter CA, Kriwacki RW.

Intrinsically disordered proteins are predicted to be highly abundant and play
broad biological roles in eukaryotic cells. In particular, by virtue of their
structural malleability and propensity to interact with multiple binding
partners, disordered proteins are thought to be specialized for roles in
signaling and regulation. However, these concepts are based on in silico analyses
of translated whole genome sequences, not on large-scale analyses of proteins
expressed in living cells. Therefore, whether these concepts broadly apply to
expressed proteins is currently unknown. Previous studies have shown that
heat-treatment of cell extracts lead to partial enrichment of soluble, disordered
proteins. On the basis of this observation, we sought to address the current
dearth of knowledge about expressed, disordered proteins by performing a
large-scale proteomics study of thermostable proteins isolated from mouse
fibroblast cells. With the use of novel multidimensional chromatography methods
and mass spectrometry, we identified a total of 1320 thermostable proteins from
these cells. Further, we used a variety of bioinformatics methods to analyze the 
structural and biological properties of these proteins. Interestingly, more than 
900 of these expressed proteins were predicted to be substantially disordered.
These were divided into two categories, with 514 predicted to be predominantly
disordered and 395 predicted to exhibit both disordered and ordered/folded
features. In addition, 411 of the thermostable proteins were predicted to be
folded. Despite the use of heat treatment (60 min at 98 degrees C) to partially
enrich for disordered proteins, which might have been expected to select for
small proteins, the sequences of these proteins exhibited a wide range of lengths
(622 +/- 555 residues (average length +/- standard deviation) for disordered
proteins and 569 +/- 598 residues for folded proteins). Computational structural 
analyses revealed several unexpected features of the thermostable proteins: (1)
disordered domains and coiled-coil domains occurred together in a large number of
disordered proteins, suggesting functional interplay between these domains; and
(2) more than 170 proteins contained lengthy domains (>300 residues) known to be 
folded. Reference to Gene Ontology Consortium functional annotations revealed
that, while disordered proteins play diverse biological roles in mouse
fibroblasts, they do exhibit heightened involvement in several functional
categories, including, cytoskeletal structure and cell movement, metabolic and
biosynthetic processes, organelle structure, cell division, gene transcription,
and ribonucleoprotein complexes. We believe that these results reflect the
general properties of the mouse intrinsically disordered proteome (IDP-ome)
although they also reflect the specialized physiology of fibroblast cells.
Large-scale identification of expressed, thermostable proteins from other cell
types in the future, grown under varied physiological conditions, will
dramatically expand our understanding of the structural and biological properties
of disordered eukaryotic proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/pr800308v 
PMCID: PMC2760310
PMID: 19067583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. PLoS Comput Biol. 2008 Dec;4(12):e1000243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000243.
Epub 2008 Dec 19.

Malleable machines in transcription regulation: the mediator complex.

Tóth-Petróczy A(1), Oldfield CJ, Simon I, Takagi Y, Dunker AK, Uversky VN,
Fuxreiter M.

The Mediator complex provides an interface between gene-specific regulatory
proteins and the general transcription machinery including RNA polymerase II
(RNAP II). The complex has a modular architecture (Head, Middle, and Tail) and
cryoelectron microscopy analysis suggested that it undergoes dramatic
conformational changes upon interactions with activators and RNAP II. These
rearrangements have been proposed to play a role in the assembly of the
preinitiation complex and also to contribute to the regulatory mechanism of
Mediator. In analogy to many regulatory and transcriptional proteins, we reasoned
that Mediator might also utilize intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) to
facilitate structural transitions and transmit transcriptional signals. Indeed, a
high prevalence of IDRs was found in various subunits of Mediator from both
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Homo sapiens, especially in the Tail and the Middle 
modules. The level of disorder increases from yeast to man, although in both
organisms it significantly exceeds that of multiprotein complexes of a similar
size. IDRs can contribute to Mediator's function in three different ways: they
can individually serve as target sites for multiple partners having distinctive
structures; they can act as malleable linkers connecting globular domains that
impart modular functionality on the complex; and they can also facilitate
assembly and disassembly of complexes in response to regulatory signals. Short
segments of IDRs, termed molecular recognition features (MoRFs) distinguished by 
a high protein-protein interaction propensity, were identified in 16 and 19
subunits of the yeast and human Mediator, respectively. In Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, the functional roles of 11 MoRFs have been experimentally verified,
and those in the Med8/Med18/Med20 and Med7/Med21 complexes were structurally
confirmed. Although the Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Homo sapiens Mediator
sequences are only weakly conserved, the arrangements of the disordered regions
and their embedded interaction sites are quite similar in the two organisms. All 
of these data suggest an integral role for intrinsic disorder in Mediator's
function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000243 
PMCID: PMC2588115
PMID: 19096501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Virol J. 2008 Oct 23;5:126. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-5-126.

A comparative analysis of viral matrix proteins using disorder predictors.

Goh GK(1), Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

BACKGROUND: A previous study (Goh G.K.-M., Dunker A.K., Uversky V.N. (2008)
Protein intrinsic disorder toolbox for comparative analysis of viral proteins.
BMC Genomics. 9 (Suppl. 2), S4) revealed that HIV matrix protein p17 possesses
especially high levels of predicted intrinsic disorder (PID). In this study, we
analyzed the PID patterns in matrix proteins of viruses related and unrelated to 
HIV-1.
RESULTS: Both SIVmac and HIV-1 p17 proteins were predicted by PONDR VLXT to be
highly disordered with subtle differences containing 50% and 60% disordered
residues, respectively. SIVmac is very closely related to HIV-2. A specific
region that is predicted to be disordered in HIV-1 is missing in SIVmac. The
distributions of PID patterns seem to differ in SIVmac and HIV-1 p17 proteins. A 
high level of PID for the matrix does not seem to be mandatory for retroviruses, 
since Equine Infectious Anemia Virus (EIAV), an HIV cousin, has been predicted to
have low PID level for the matrix; i.e. its matrix protein p15 contains only 21% 
PID residues. Surprisingly, the PID percentage and the pattern of predicted
disorder distribution for p15 resemble those of the influenza matrix protein M1
(25%).
CONCLUSION: Our data might have important implications in the search for HIV
vaccines since disorder in the matrix protein might provide a mechanism for
immune evasion.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-5-126 
PMCID: PMC2579295
PMID: 18947403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. PLoS One. 2008 Oct 8;4(10):e7350. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007350.

Human sirt-1: molecular modeling and structure-function relationships of an
unordered protein.

Autiero I(1), Costantini S, Colonna G.

BACKGROUND: Sirt-1 is a NAD+-dependent nuclear deacetylase of 747 residues that
in mammals is involved in various important metabolic pathways, such as glucose
metabolism and insulin secretion, and often works on many different metabolic
substrates as a multifunctional protein. Sirt-1 down-regulates p53 activity,
rising lifespan, and cell survival; it also deacetylases peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) and its coactivator 1 alpha
(PGC-1alpha), promoting lipid mobilization, positively regulating insulin
secretion, and increasing mitochondrial dimension and number. Therefore, it has
been implicated in diseases such as diabetes and the metabolic syndrome and,
also, in the mechanisms of longevity induced by calorie restriction. Its whole
structure is not yet experimentally determined and the structural features of its
allosteric site are unknown, and no information is known about the structural
changes determined by the binding of its allosteric effectors.
METHODOLOGY: In this study, we modelled the whole three-dimensional structure of 
Sirt-1 and that of its endogenous activator, the nuclear protein AROS. Moreover, 
we modelled the Sirt-1/AROS complex in order to study the structural basis of its
activation and regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Amazingly, the structural data show that Sirt-1 is an unordered
protein with a globular core and two large unordered structural regions at both
termini, which play an important role in the protein-protein interaction.
Moreover, we have found on Sirt-1 a conserved pharmacophore pocket of which we
have discussed the implication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007350 
PMCID: PMC2753774
PMID: 19806227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. BMC Genomics. 2008 Sep 16;9 Suppl 2:S4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-S2-S4.

Protein intrinsic disorder toolbox for comparative analysis of viral proteins.

Goh GK(1), Dunker AK, Uversky VN.

To examine the usefulness of protein disorder predictions as a tool for the
comparative analysis of viral proteins, a relational database has been
constructed. The database includes proteins from influenza A and HIV-related
viruses. Annotations include viral protein sequence, disorder prediction,
structure, and function. Location of each protein within a virion, if known, is
also denoted. Our analysis reveals a clear relationship between proximity to the 
RNA core and the percentage of predicted disordered residues for a set of
influenza A virus proteins. Neuraminidases (NA) and hemagglutinin (HA) of major
influenza A pandemics tend to pair in such a way that both proteins tend to be
either ordered-ordered or disordered-disordered by prediction. This may be the
result of these proteins evolving from being lipid-associated. High abundance of 
intrinsic disorder in envelope and matrix proteins from HIV-related viruses
likely represents a mechanism where HIV virions can escape immune response
despite the availability of antibodies for the HIV-related proteins. This
exercise provides an example showing how the combined use of intrinsic disorder
predictions and relational databases provides an improved understanding of the
functional and structural behaviour of viral proteins.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-S2-S4 
PMCID: PMC2559894
PMID: 18831795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. BMC Genomics. 2008 Sep 16;9 Suppl 2:S1. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-S2-S1.

The unfoldomics decade: an update on intrinsically disordered proteins.

Dunker AK(1), Oldfield CJ, Meng J, Romero P, Yang JY, Chen JW, Vacic V, Obradovic
Z, Uversky VN.

BACKGROUND: Our first predictor of protein disorder was published just over a
decade ago in the Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Neural
Networks (Romero P, Obradovic Z, Kissinger C, Villafranca JE, Dunker AK (1997)
Identifying disordered regions in proteins from amino acid sequence. Proceedings 
of the IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks, 1: 90-95). By now more
than twenty other laboratory groups have joined the efforts to improve the
prediction of protein disorder. While the various prediction methodologies used
for protein intrinsic disorder resemble those methodologies used for secondary
structure prediction, the two types of structures are entirely different. For
example, the two structural classes have very different dynamic properties, with 
the irregular secondary structure class being much less mobile than the disorder 
class. The prediction of secondary structure has been useful. On the other hand, 
the prediction of intrinsic disorder has been revolutionary, leading to major
modifications of the more than 100 year-old views relating protein structure and 
function. Experimentalists have been providing evidence over many decades that
some proteins lack fixed structure or are disordered (or unfolded) under
physiological conditions. In addition, experimentalists are also showing that,
for many proteins, their functions depend on the unstructured rather than
structured state; such results are in marked contrast to the greater than hundred
year old views such as the lock and key hypothesis. Despite extensive data on
many important examples, including disease-associated proteins, the importance of
disorder for protein function has been largely ignored. Indeed, to our knowledge,
current biochemistry books don't present even one acknowledged example of a
disorder-dependent function, even though some reports of disorder-dependent
functions are more than 50 years old. The results from genome-wide predictions of
intrinsic disorder and the results from other bioinformatics studies of intrinsic
disorder are demanding attention for these proteins.
RESULTS: Disorder prediction has been important for showing that the relatively
few experimentally characterized examples are members of a very large collection 
of related disordered proteins that are wide-spread over all three domains of
life. Many significant biological functions are now known to depend directly on, 
or are importantly associated with, the unfolded or partially folded state. Here 
our goal is to review the key discoveries and to weave these discoveries together
to support novel approaches for understanding sequence-function relationships.
CONCLUSION: Intrinsically disordered protein is common across the three domains
of life, but especially common among the eukaryotic proteomes. Signaling
sequences and sites of posttranslational modifications are frequently, or very
likely most often, located within regions of intrinsic disorder.
Disorder-to-order transitions are coupled with the adoption of different
structures with different partners. Also, the flexibility of intrinsic disorder
helps different disordered regions to bind to a common binding site on a common
partner. Such capacity for binding diversity plays important roles in both
protein-protein interaction networks and likely also in gene regulation networks.
Such disorder-based signaling is further modulated in multicellular eukaryotes by
alternative splicing, for which such splicing events map to regions of disorder
much more often than to regions of structure. Associating alternative splicing
with disorder rather than structure alleviates theoretical and experimentally
observed problems associated with the folding of different length, isomeric amino
acid sequences. The combination of disorder and alternative splicing is proposed 
to provide a mechanism for easily "trying out" different signaling pathways,
thereby providing the mechanism for generating signaling diversity and enabling
the evolution of cell differentiation and multicellularity. Finally, several
recent small molecules of interest as potential drugs have been shown to act by
blocking protein-protein interactions based on intrinsic disorder of one of the
partners. Study of these examples has led to a new approach for drug discovery,
and bioinformatics analysis of the human proteome suggests that various
disease-associated proteins are very rich in such disorder-based drug discovery
targets.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-S2-S1 
PMCID: PMC2559873
PMID: 18831774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2008 Sep;98(1):85-106. doi:
10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2008.05.007. Epub 2008 Jun 20.

Intrinsic disorder in scaffold proteins: getting more from less.

Cortese MS(1), Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Regulation, recognition and cell signaling involve the coordinated actions of
many players. Signaling scaffolds, with their ability to bring together proteins 
belonging to common and/or interlinked pathways, play crucial roles in
orchestrating numerous events by coordinating specific interactions among
signaling proteins. This review examines the roles of intrinsic disorder (ID) in 
signaling scaffold protein function. Several well-characterized scaffold proteins
with structurally and functionally characterized ID regions are used here to
illustrate the importance of ID for scaffolding function. These examples include 
scaffolds that are mostly disordered, only partially disordered or those in which
the ID resides in a scaffold partner. Specific scaffolds discussed include RNase,
voltage-activated potassium channels, axin, BRCA1, GSK-3beta, p53, Ste5, titin,
Fus3, BRCA1, MAP2, D-AKAP2 and AKAP250. Among the mechanisms discussed are:
molecular recognition features, fly-casting, ease of encounter complex formation,
structural isolation of partners, modulation of interactions between bound
partners, masking of intramolecular interaction sites, maximized interaction
surface per residue, toleration of high evolutionary rates, binding site overlap,
allosteric modification, palindromic binding, reduced constraints for alternative
splicing, efficient regulation via posttranslational modification, efficient
regulation via rapid degradation, protection of normally solvent-exposed sites,
enhancing the plasticity of interaction and molecular crowding. We conclude that 
ID can enhance scaffold function by a diverse array of mechanisms. In other
words, scaffold proteins utilize several ID-facilitated mechanisms to enhance
function, and by doing so, get more functionality from less structure.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2008.05.007 
PMCID: PMC2671330
PMID: 18619997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochemistry. 2008 Aug 19;47(33):8665-77. doi: 10.1021/bi800806d. Epub 2008 Jul
25.

Effect of methionine oxidation on the structural properties, conformational
stability, and aggregation of immunoglobulin light chain LEN.

Hu D(1), Qin Z, Xue B, Fink AL, Uversky VN.

Light chain amyloidoses arise from the overproduction and abnormal deposition of 
the immunoglobulin light chain in various organs. LEN is the variable domain of
an immunoglobulin light chain originally isolated from the urine of a patient
suffering from multiple myeloma, with no sign of renal dysfunction or
amyloidosis. LEN was shown to form fibrils in vitro under mildly destabilizing
conditions. In this work, we investigated the changes induced by methionine
oxidation in the structural properties, conformational stability, and aggregation
behavior of immunoglobulin light chain domain LEN. We established that LEN was
well-protected from oxidation in its native state, but successful oxidation was
achieved in the presence of 4 M GuHCl. Oxidation induced noticeable structural
changes in LEN and destabilized this protein. The methionine-oxidized LEN
preferred to form amorphous aggregates instead of fibrils. The results indicated 
that the LEN oxidation may play an important role in amorphous deposition of the 
protein, but not in its fibrillation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi800806d 
PMCID: PMC2676884
PMID: 18652490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Biophys J. 2008 Aug;95(4):1612-26. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.108.131151. Epub 2008
Apr 25.

The twilight zone between protein order and disorder.

Szilágyi A(1), Györffy D, Závodszky P.

The amino acid composition of intrinsically disordered proteins and protein
segments characteristically differs from that of ordered proteins. This
observation forms the basis of several disorder prediction methods. These,
however, usually perform worse for smaller proteins (or segments) than for larger
ones. We show that the regions of amino acid composition space corresponding to
ordered and disordered proteins overlap with each other, and the extent of the
overlap (the "twilight zone") is larger for short than for long chains. To
explain this finding, we used two-dimensional lattice model proteins containing
hydrophobic, polar, and charged monomers and revealed the relation among chain
length, amino acid composition, and disorder. Because the number of chain
configurations exponentially grows with chain length, a larger fraction of longer
chains can reach a low-energy, ordered state than do shorter chains. The amount
of information carried by the amino acid composition about whether a protein or
segment is (dis)ordered grows with increasing chain length. Smaller proteins rely
more on specific interactions for stability, which limits the possible accuracy
of disorder prediction methods. For proteins in the "twilight zone", size can
determine order, as illustrated by the example of two-state homodimers.

DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.108.131151 
PMCID: PMC2483749
PMID: 18441033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Virology. 2008 Aug 1;377(2):280-8. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.04.025. Epub 2008
Jun 3.

Potato virus A genome-linked protein VPg is an intrinsically disordered molten
globule-like protein with a hydrophobic core.

Rantalainen KI(1), Uversky VN, Permi P, Kalkkinen N, Dunker AK, Mäkinen K.

Genome-linked protein VPg of Potato virus A (PVA; genus Potyvirus) has essential 
functions in all critical steps of PVA infection, i.e. replication, movement, and
virulence. Structural features of the recombinant PVA VPg were investigated with 
the aim to create an outline for structure-function relationships. Circular
dichroism data of PVA VPg revealed a distinct near-UV spectrum indicating that
the environment around its aromatic residues is structured but rather flexible,
and a far-UV spectrum that was characterized by features typical for
intrinsically disordered proteins. Temperature-induced denaturation followed a
typical all-or-none transition whereas urea- and GdmHCl-induced denaturation
proceeded via a route best described by a three-state-model. The conclusion drawn
was that the overall structure of PVA VPg is significantly unstable even in the
absence of denaturants. Acrylamide fluorescence quenching and
1-anilino-8-naphthalene sulfonate binding experiments together with 1D and 2D NMR
data further verified that PVA VPg behaves as a partially folded species that
contains a hydrophobic core domain. Regions predicted to be disordered in PVA VPg
were the ones that were cut the fastest by trypsin whereas regions predicted to
be structured and to contain the most conserved amino acids among potyvirus VPgs 
were trypsin-resistant. Amino acid composition analysis of potyvirus VPgs
revealed a clear enrichment of disorder and depletion of structure-promoting
residues. Taken together it seems that the native structure of PVA VPg, and
probably that of potyviral VPg in general, resembles a partially disordered
molten globule. Further experimentation is required to understand the functional 
regulation achieved via this property.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.04.025 
PMCID: PMC2796300
PMID: 18533220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Biochemistry. 2008 Jul 22;47(29):7598-609. doi: 10.1021/bi8006803.

Regulation of cell division by intrinsically unstructured proteins: intrinsic
flexibility, modularity, and signaling conduits.

Galea CA(1), Wang Y, Sivakolundu SG, Kriwacki RW.

It is now widely recognized that intrinsically unstructured (or disordered)
proteins (IUPs or IDPs) are found in organisms from all kingdoms of life. In
eukaryotes, IUPs are highly abundant and perform a wide range of biological
functions, including regulation and signaling. Despite an increased level of
interest in understanding the structural biology of IUPs and IDPs, questions
regarding the mechanisms through which disordered proteins perform their
biological function(s) remain. In other words, what are the relationships between
disorder and function for IUPs? There are several excellent reviews that discuss 
the structural properties of IUPs and IDPs since 2005 [Receveur-Brechot, V., et
al. (2006) Proteins 62, 24-45; Mittag, T., and Forman-Kay, J. D. (2007) Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 17, 3-14; Dyson, H. J., and Wright, P. E. (2005) Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 6, 197-208]. Here, we briefly review general concepts pertaining 
to IUPs and then discuss our structural, biophysical, and biochemical studies of 
two IUPs, p21 and p27, which regulate the mammalian cell division cycle by
inhibiting cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks). Some segments of these two proteins
are partially folded in isolation, and they fold further upon binding their
biological targets. Interestingly, some portions of p27 remain flexible after
binding to and inhibiting the Cdk2-cyclin A complex. This residual flexibility
allows otherwise buried tyrosine residues within p27 to be phosphorylated by
non-receptor tyrosine kinases (NRTKs). Tyrosine phosphorylation relieves kinase
inhibition, triggering Cdk2-mediated phosphorylation of a threonine residue
within the flexible C-terminus of p27. This, in turn, marks p27 for
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, unleashing full Cdk2 activity which
drives cell cycle progression. p27, thus, constitutes a conduit for transmission 
of proliferative signals via post-translational modifications. The term "conduit"
is used here to connote a means of transmission of molecular signals which, in
the case of p27, correspond to tyrosine and threonine phosphorylation,
ubiquitination, and, ultimately, proteolytic degradation. Transmission of these
multiple signals is enabled by the inherent flexibility of p27 which persists
even after tight binding to the Cdk2-cyclin A complex. Importantly, activation of
the p27 signaling conduit by oncogenic NRTKs contributes to tumorigenesis in some
human cancers, including chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) [Grimmler, M., et al.
(2007) Cell 128, 269-280] and breast cancer [Chu, I., et al. (2007) Cell 128,
281-294]. Other IUPs may participate in conceptually similar molecular signaling 
conduits, and dysregulation of these putative conduits may contribute to other
human diseases. Detailed study of these IUPs, both alone and within functional
complexes, is required to test these hypotheses and to more fully understand the 
relationships between protein disorder and biological function.

DOI: 10.1021/bi8006803 
PMCID: PMC2580775
PMID: 18627125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 18;283(29):20523-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803021200. Epub 2008
May 22.

Rett syndrome-causing mutations in human MeCP2 result in diverse structural
changes that impact folding and DNA interactions.

Ghosh RP(1), Horowitz-Scherer RA, Nikitina T, Gierasch LM, Woodcock CL.

Most cases of Rett syndrome (RTT) are caused by mutations in the methylated
DNA-binding protein, MeCP2. Here, we have shown that frequent RTT-causing
missense mutations (R106W, R133C, F155S, T158M) located in the methylated
DNA-binding domain (MBD) of MeCP2 have profound and diverse effects on its
structure, stability, and DNA-binding properties. Fluorescence spectroscopy,
which reports on the single tryptophan in the MBD, indicated that this residue is
strongly protected from the aqueous environment in the wild type but is more
exposed in the R133C and F155S mutations. In the mutant proteins R133C, F155S,
and T158M, the thermal stability of the domain was strongly reduced. Thermal
stability of the wild-type protein was increased in the presence of unmethylated 
DNA and was further enhanced by DNA methylation. DNA-induced thermal stability
was also seen, but to a lesser extent, in each of the mutant proteins. Circular
dichroism (CD) of the MBD revealed differences in the secondary structure of the 
four mutants. Upon binding to methylated DNA, the wild type showed a subtle but
reproducible increase in alpha-helical structure, whereas the F155S and R106W did
not acquire secondary structure with DNA. Each of the mutant proteins studied is 
unique in terms of the properties of the MBD and the structural changes induced
by DNA binding. For each mutation, we examined the extent to which the magnitude 
of these differences correlated with the severity of RTT patient symptoms.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M803021200 
PMCID: PMC2459279
PMID: 18499664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Biophys J. 2008 Jun;94(12):4847-66. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.107.125823. Epub 2008
Mar 7.

Backbone dynamics of the 18.5 kDa isoform of myelin basic protein reveals
transient alpha-helices and a calmodulin-binding site.

Libich DS(1), Harauz G.

The 18.5 kDa isoform of myelin basic protein (MBP) is the predominant form in
adult human central nervous system myelin. It is an intrinsically disordered
protein that functions both in membrane adhesion, and as a linker connecting the 
oligodendrocyte membrane to the underlying cytoskeleton; its specific
interactions with calmodulin and SH3-domain containing proteins suggest further
multifunctionality in signaling. Here, we have used multidimensional
heteronuclear nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to study the conformational
dependence on environment of the protein in aqueous solution (100 mM KCl) and in 
a membrane-mimetic solvent (30% TFE-d(2)), particularly to analyze its secondary 
structure using chemical shift indexing, and to investigate its backbone dynamics
using (15)N spin relaxation measurements. Collectively, the data revealed three
major segments of the protein with a propensity toward alpha-helicity that was
stabilized by membrane-mimetic conditions: T33-D46, V83-T92, and T142-L154
(murine 18.5 kDa sequence numbering). All of these regions corresponded with
bioinformatics predictions of ordered secondary structure. The V83-T92 region
comprises a primary immunodominant epitope that had previously been shown by
site-directed spin labeling and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy to
be alpha-helical in membrane-reconstituted systems. The T142-L154 segment
overlapped with a predicted calmodulin-binding site. Chemical shift perturbation 
experiments using labeled MBP and unlabeled calmodulin demonstrated a dramatic
conformational change in MBP upon association of the two proteins, and were
consistent with the C-terminal segment of MBP being the primary binding site for 
calmodulin.

DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.107.125823 
PMCID: PMC2397351
PMID: 18326633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2008 Jun;5(3):260-87.

Amyloidogenesis of natively unfolded proteins.

Uversky VN(1).

Aggregation and subsequent development of protein deposition diseases originate
from conformational changes in corresponding amyloidogenic proteins. The
accumulated data support the model where protein fibrillogenesis proceeds via the
formation of a relatively unfolded amyloidogenic conformation, which shares many 
structural properties with the pre-molten globule state, a partially folded
intermediate first found during the equilibrium and kinetic (un)folding studies
of several globular proteins and later described as one of the structural forms
of natively unfolded proteins. The flexibility of this structural form is
essential for the conformational rearrangements driving the formation of the core
cross-beta structure of the amyloid fibril. Obviously, molecular mechanisms
describing amyloidogenesis of ordered and natively unfolded proteins are
different. For ordered protein to fibrillate, its unique and rigid structure has 
to be destabilized and partially unfolded. On the other hand, fibrillogenesis of 
a natively unfolded protein involves the formation of partially folded
conformation; i.e., partial folding rather than unfolding. In this review recent 
findings are surveyed to illustrate some unique features of the natively unfolded
proteins amyloidogenesis.


PMCID: PMC2719783
PMID: 18537543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2008 Jun;18(3):375-81. doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2008.02.007.
Epub 2008 May 17.

Improvisation in evolution of genes and genomes: whose structure is it anyway?

Shakhnovich BE(1), Shakhnovich EI.

Significant progress has been made in recent years in a variety of seemingly
unrelated fields such as sequencing, protein structure prediction, and
high-throughput transcriptomics and metabolomics. At the same time, new
microscopic models have been developed that made it possible to analyze the
evolution of genes and genomes from first principles. The results from these
efforts enable, for the first time, a comprehensive insight into the evolution of
complex systems and organisms on all scales--from sequences to organisms and
populations. Every newly sequenced genome uncovers new genes, families, and
folds. Where do these new genes come from? How do gene duplication and subsequent
divergence of sequence and structure affect the fitness of the organism? What
role does regulation play in the evolution of proteins and folds? Emerging
synergism between data and modeling provides first robust answers to these
questions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.2008.02.007 
PMCID: PMC3533375
PMID: 18487041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Proteome Res. 2008 Jun;7(6):2234-45. doi: 10.1021/pr800055r. Epub 2008 May 9.

Protein disorder is positively correlated with gene expression in Escherichia
coli.

Paliy O(1), Gargac SM, Cheng Y, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

We considered, on a global scale, the relationship between the predicted fraction
of protein disorder and the RNA and protein expression in Escherichia coli.
Fraction of protein disorder correlated positively with both measured RNA
expression levels of E. coli genes in three different growth media and with
predicted abundance levels of E. coli proteins. Though weak, the correlation was 
highly significant. Correlation of protein disorder with RNA expression did not
depend on the growth rate of E. coli cultures and was not caused by a small
subset of genes showing exceptionally high concordance in their disorder and
expression levels. Global analysis was complemented by detailed consideration of 
several groups of proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/pr800055r 
PMCID: PMC2754758
PMID: 18465893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mol Cell. 2008 Jan 18;29(1):112-21. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.10.030.

Direct visualization of asymmetric adenine-nucleotide-induced conformational
changes in MutL alpha.

Sacho EJ(1), Kadyrov FA, Modrich P, Kunkel TA, Erie DA.

MutL alpha, the heterodimeric eukaryotic MutL homolog, is required for DNA
mismatch repair (MMR) in vivo. It has been suggested that conformational changes,
modulated by adenine nucleotides, mediate the interactions of MutL alpha with
other proteins in the MMR pathway, coordinating the recognition of DNA mismatches
by MutS alpha and the activation of MutL alpha with the downstream events that
lead to repair. Thus far, the only evidence for these conformational changes has 
come from X-ray crystallography of isolated domains, indirect biochemical
analyses, and comparison to other members of the GHL ATPase family to which MutL 
alpha belongs. Using atomic force microscopy (AFM), coupled with biochemical
techniques, we demonstrate that adenine nucleotides induce large asymmetric
conformational changes in full-length yeast and human MutL alpha and that these
changes are associated with significant increases in secondary structure. These
data reveal an ATPase cycle in which sequential nucleotide binding, hydrolysis,
and release modulate the conformational states of MutL alpha.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.10.030 
PMCID: PMC2820111
PMID: 18206974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mol Syst Biol. 2008;4:179. doi: 10.1038/msb.2008.16. Epub 2008 Mar 25.

The role of disorder in interaction networks: a structural analysis.

Kim PM(1), Sboner A, Xia Y, Gerstein M.

Recent studies have emphasized the value of including structural information into
the topological analysis of protein networks. Here, we utilized structural
information to investigate the role of intrinsic disorder in these networks. Hub 
proteins tend to be more disordered than other proteins (i.e. the proteome
average); however, we find this only true for those with one or two binding
interfaces ('single'-interface hubs). In contrast, the distribution of disordered
residues in multi-interface hubs is indistinguishable from the overall proteome. 
Surprisingly, we find that the binding interfaces in single-interface hubs are
highly structured, as is the case for multi-interface hubs. However, the binding 
partners of single-interface hubs tend to have a higher level of disorder than
the proteome average, suggesting that their binding promiscuity is related to the
disorder of their binding partners. In turn, the higher level of disorder of
single-interface hubs can be partly explained by their tendency to bind to each
other in a cascade. A good illustration of this trend can be found in signaling
pathways and, more specifically, in kinase cascades. Finally, our findings have
implications for the current controversy related to party and date-hubs.

DOI: 10.1038/msb.2008.16 
PMCID: PMC2290937
PMID: 18364713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Protein Pept Lett. 2008;15(9):956-63.

TOP-IDP-scale: a new amino acid scale measuring propensity for intrinsic
disorder.

Campen A(1), Williams RM, Brown CJ, Meng J, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Intrinsically disordered proteins carry out various biological functions while
lacking ordered secondary and/or tertiary structure. In order to find general
intrinsic properties of amino acid residues that are responsible for the absence 
of ordered structure in intrinsically disordered proteins we surveyed 517 amino
acid scales. Each of these scales was taken as an independent attribute for the
subsequent analysis. For a given attribute value X, which is averaged over a
consecutive string of amino acids, and for a given data set having both ordered
and disordered segments, the conditional probabilities P(s(o) | x) and P(s(d) |
x) for order and disorder, respectively, can be determined for all possible
values of X. Plots of the conditional probabilities P(s(o) | x) and P(s(o) | x)
versus X give a pair of curves. The area between these two curves divided by the 
total area of the graph gives the area ratio value (ARV), which is proportional
to the degree of separation of the two probability curves and, therefore,
provides a measure of the given attribute's power to discriminate between order
and disorder. As ARV falls between zero and one, larger ARV corresponds to the
better discrimination between order and disorder. Starting from the scale with
the highest ARV, we applied a simulated annealing procedure to search for
alternative scale values and have managed to increase the ARV by more than 10%.
The ranking of the amino acids in this new TOP-IDP scale is as follows (from
order promoting to disorder promoting): W, F, Y, I, M, L, V, N, C, T, A, G, R, D,
H, Q, K, S, E, P. A web-based server has been created to apply the TOP-IDP scale 
to predict intrinsically disordered proteins
(http://www.disprot.org/dev/disindex.php).


PMCID: PMC2676888
PMID: 18991772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biochemistry. 2007 Nov 27;46(47):13468-77. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Mining alpha-helix-forming molecular recognition features with cross species
sequence alignments.

Cheng Y(1), Oldfield CJ, Meng J, Romero P, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

Previously described algorithms for mining alpha-helix-forming molecular
recognition elements (MoREs), described by Oldfield et al. (Oldfield, C. J.,
Cheng, Y., Cortese, M. S., Brown, C. J., Uversky, V. N., and Dunker, A. K. (2005)
Comparing and combining predictors of mostly disordered proteins, Biochemistry
44, 1989-2000), also known as molecular recognition features (MoRFs) (Mohan, A., 
Oldfield, C. J., Radivojac, P., Vacic, V., Cortese, M. S., Dunker, A. K., and
Uversky, V. N. (2006) Analysis of Molecular Recognition Features (MoRFs), J. Mol.
Biol. 362, 1043-1059), revealed that regions undergoing disorder-to-order
transition are involved in many molecular recognition events and are crucial for 
protein-protein interactions. However, these algorithms were developed using a
training data set of a limited size. Here we propose to improve the prediction
algorithms by (1) including additional alpha-MoRF examples and their cross
species homologues in the positive training set, (2) carefully extracting monomer
structure chains from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) as the negative training set,
(3) including attributes from recently developed disorder predictors, secondary
structure predictions, and amino acid indices, and (4) constructing neural
network based predictors and performing validation. Over 50 regions which undergo
disorder-to-order transition that were identified in the PDB together with a set 
of corresponding cross species homologues of each structure-based example were
included in a new positive training set. Over 1500 attributes, including disorder
predictions, secondary structure predictions, and amino acid indices, were
evaluated by the conditional probability method. The top attributes, including
VSL2 and VL3 disorder predictions and several physicochemical propensities of
amino acid residues, were used to develop the feed forward neural networks. The
sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of the resulting predictor,
alpha-MoRF-PredII, were 0.87 +/- 0.10, 0.87 +/- 0.11, and 0.87 +/- 0.08 over 10
cross validations, respectively. We present the results of these analyses and
validation examples to discuss the potential improvement of the alpha-MoRF-PredII
prediction accuracy.

DOI: 10.1021/bi7012273 
PMCID: PMC2570644
PMID: 17973494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. BMC Evol Biol. 2007 Aug 17;7:140.

Multiple domain insertions and losses in the evolution of the Rab prenylation
complex.

Rasteiro R(1), Pereira-Leal JB.

BACKGROUND: Rab proteins are regulators of vesicular trafficking, requiring a
lipid modification for proper function, prenylation of C-terminal cysteines. This
is catalysed by a complex of a catalytic heterodimer (Rab Geranylgeranyl
Transferase - RabGGTase) and an accessory protein (Rab Escort Protein. REP).
Components of this complex display domain insertions relative to paralogous
proteins. The function of these inserted domains is unclear.
RESULTS: We profiled the domain architecture of the components of the Rab
prenylation complex in evolution. We identified the orthologues of the components
of the Rab prenylation machinery in 43 organisms, representing the crown
eukaryotic groups. We characterize in detail the domain structure of all these
components and the phylogenetic relationships between the individual domains.
CONCLUSION: We found different domain insertions in different taxa, in
alpha-subunits of RGGTase and REP. Our results suggest that there were multiple
insertions, expansions and contractions in the evolution of this prenylation
complex.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-7-140 
PMCID: PMC1994686
PMID: 17705859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Proteome Res. 2007 May;6(5):1917-32. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 3. Ligands, post-translational
modifications, and diseases associated with intrinsically disordered proteins.

Xie H(1), Vucetic S, Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Uversky 
VN.

Currently, the understanding of the relationships between function, amino acid
sequence, and protein structure continues to represent one of the major
challenges of the modern protein science. As many as 50% of eukaryotic proteins
are likely to contain functionally important long disordered regions. Many
proteins are wholly disordered but still possess numerous biologically important 
functions. However, the number of experimentally confirmed disordered proteins
with known biological functions is substantially smaller than their actual number
in nature. Therefore, there is a crucial need for novel bionformatics approaches 
that allow projection of the current knowledge from a few experimentally verified
examples to much larger groups of known and potential proteins. The elaboration
of a bioinformatics tool for the analysis of functional diversity of
intrinsically disordered proteins and application of this data mining tool to
>200 000 proteins from the Swiss-Prot database, each annotated with at least one 
of the 875 functional keywords, was described in the first paper of this series
(Xie, H.; Vucetic, S.; Iakoucheva, L. M.; Oldfield, C. J.; Dunker, A. K.;
Obradovic, Z.; Uversky, V.N. Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 1.
Biological processes and functions of proteins with long disordered regions. J.
Proteome Res. 2007, 5, 1882-1898). Using this tool, we have found that out of the
710 Swiss-Prot functional keywords associated with at least 20 proteins, 262 were
strongly positively correlated with long intrinsically disordered regions, and
302 were strongly negatively correlated. Illustrative examples of functional
disorder or order were found for the vast majority of keywords showing strongest 
positive or negative correlation with intrinsic disorder, respectively. Some 80
Swiss-Prot keywords associated with disorder- and order-driven biological
processes and protein functions were described in the first paper (see above).
The second paper of the series was devoted to the presentation of 87 Swiss-Prot
keywords attributed to the cellular components, domains, technical terms,
developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities possessing strong
positive and negative correlation with long disordered regions (Vucetic, S.; Xie,
H.; Iakoucheva, L. M.; Oldfield, C. J.; Dunker, A. K.; Obradovic, Z.; Uversky, V.
N. Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 2. Cellular components, domains,
technical terms, developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities
correlated with long disordered regions. J. Proteome Res. 2007, 5, 1899-1916).
Protein structure and functionality can be modulated by various
post-translational modifications or/and as a result of binding of specific
ligands. Numerous human diseases are associated with protein
misfolding/misassembly/misfunctioning. This work concludes the series of papers
dedicated to the functional anthology of intrinsic disorder and describes
approximately 80 Swiss-Prot functional keywords that are related to ligands,
post-translational modifications, and diseases possessing strong positive or
negative correlation with the predicted long disordered regions in proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/pr060394e 
PMCID: PMC2588348
PMID: 17391016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Proteome Res. 2007 May;6(5):1899-916. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 2. Cellular components, domains,
technical terms, developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities
correlated with long disordered regions.

Vucetic S(1), Xie H, Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Uversky 
VN.

Biologically active proteins without stable ordered structure (i.e.,
intrinsically disordered proteins) are attracting increased attention. Functional
repertoires of ordered and disordered proteins are very different, and the
ability to differentiate whether a given function is associated with intrinsic
disorder or with a well-folded protein is crucial for modern protein science.
However, there is a large gap between the number of proteins experimentally
confirmed to be disordered and their actual number in nature. As a result,
studies of functional properties of confirmed disordered proteins, while helpful 
in revealing the functional diversity of protein disorder, provide only a limited
view. To overcome this problem, a bioinformatics approach for comprehensive study
of functional roles of protein disorder was proposed in the first paper of this
series (Xie, H.; Vucetic, S.; Iakoucheva, L. M.; Oldfield, C. J.; Dunker, A. K.; 
Obradovic, Z.; Uversky, V. N. Functional anthology of intrinsic disorder. 1.
Biological processes and functions of proteins with long disordered regions. J.
Proteome Res. 2007, 5, 1882-1898). Applying this novel approach to Swiss-Prot
sequences and functional keywords, we found over 238 and 302 keywords to be
strongly positively or negatively correlated, respectively, with long
intrinsically disordered regions. This paper describes approximately 90
Swiss-Prot keywords attributed to the cellular components, domains, technical
terms, developmental processes, and coding sequence diversities possessing strong
positive and negative correlation with long disordered regions.

DOI: 10.1021/pr060393m 
PMCID: PMC2588346
PMID: 17391015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Biophys J. 2007 Mar 1;92(5):1439-56. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

Intrinsic disorder and functional proteomics.

Radivojac P(1), Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Obradovic Z, Uversky VN, Dunker AK.

The recent advances in the prediction of intrinsically disordered proteins and
the use of protein disorder prediction in the fields of molecular biology and
bioinformatics are reviewed here, especially with regard to protein function.
First, a close look is taken at intrinsically disordered proteins and then at the
methods used for their experimental characterization. Next, the major statistical
properties of disordered regions are summarized, and prediction models developed 
thus far are described, including their numerous applications in functional
proteomics. The future of the prediction of protein disorder and the future uses 
of such predictions in functional proteomics comprise the last section of this
article.

DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.106.094045 
PMCID: PMC1796814
PMID: 17158572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

